Sentence nr: 0
Apr.

Sentence nr: 1
29, 2014 at 9:26 AM Which States Are in the Midwest?

Sentence nr: 2
By Walt Hickey Filed under Regionalism Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/region-survey FacebookTwitterEmail A cornfield in Savoy, Illinois.

Sentence nr: 3
Seth Perlman / AP Here’s a somewhat regular argument I get in: Which states make up which regions of the United States?

Sentence nr: 4
Some of these regions — the West Coast, Mountain States, Southwest and Northeast are pretty clearly defined — but two other regions, the South and the Midwest, are more nebulous.

Sentence nr: 5
I’m from New York, and I generally consider anything west of Philadelphia the Midwest.

Sentence nr: 6
This admittedly unsophisticated designation is frequently criticized by self-avowed Midwesterners.

Sentence nr: 7
My boss, originally of Michigan, has many opinions about what, precisely, falls into the Midwest.

Sentence nr: 8
So I decided to find out which states Midwesterners consider to be in their territory.

Sentence nr: 9
To get this broad-based view, we asked SurveyMonkey Audience to ask self-identified Midwesterners which states make the cut.

Sentence nr: 10
We ran a national survey that targeted the Midwest from March 12 to March 17, with 2,778 respondents.

Sentence nr: 11
Of those, 1,357 respondents identified “a lot” or “some” as a Midwesterner.

Sentence nr: 12
We then asked this group to identify the states they consider part of the Midwest.

Sentence nr: 13
There are a lot of things here worth looking into.

Sentence nr: 14
First, many people aren’t too sure about where the core of the Midwest is.

Sentence nr: 15
Everybody selected at least one state for the question.

Sentence nr: 16
But even Illinois — home of the preeminent Midwestern city, Chicago — was identified as Midwestern by just about 80 percent of respondents.

Sentence nr: 17
Contrast this with our soon-to-be-released Southern survey, in which people were somewhat adamant about which states make the group.

Sentence nr: 18
One potential, albeit anecdotal, source of this?

Sentence nr: 19
Several self-proclaimed Midwestern sources I spoke with have a very limited definition of the Midwest: namely, their state and any state bordering it.

Sentence nr: 20
Minnesotans thought they made up the true Midwest; Hoosiers thought they did.

Sentence nr: 21
I can’t say either way.

Sentence nr: 22
Second, the potential Midwest spans further south than I thought.

Sentence nr: 23
If half of our respondents thought Missouri and a quarter thought Oklahoma were in the Midwest, I probably should have asked about Arkansas, if only to pinpoint how far south people think the region expands.

Sentence nr: 24
This Yankee regrets the error.

Sentence nr: 25
Indiana, Iowa and Illinois appear to be the core of the Midwest, each pulling more than 70 percent of the vote (that may partly be because of their substantial populations).

Sentence nr: 26
Michigan, Wisconsin and Minnesota each pulled at least 60 percent of the vote, so we can probably put them in the Midwest without too much fuss.

Sentence nr: 27
Ohio, Missouri and Kansas each got more than half.

Sentence nr: 28
As for the rest of the states, it seems unclear whether they’re in the true Midwest.

Sentence nr: 29
If anything, the Midwest is as nebulous as I’d expected.

Sentence nr: 30
Too often, people refer to vast swaths of American territory as a solid region.

Sentence nr: 31
It’s easy to break Americans into tribes such as “Midwestern,” but there are more subdivisions and diversity in these groupings than we generally acknowledge.

Sentence nr: 32
Except when it comes to the South.

Sentence nr: 33
The South is more sure about what the South is, as you’ll soon see.

