Sentence nr: 0
Dissecting Trump’s Most Rabid Online Following By Trevor Martin | Art by yesyesno Filed under Donald Trump Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/subreddit-algebra Published Mar.

Sentence nr: 1
23, 2017 FacebookTwitterEmail r/The Donald –+– r/politics r/uncensorednews r/conspiracy === r/fatpeoplehate r/HillaryForPrison r/CFB Editor’s note: The story below contains two slurs that appear in the names of subreddits.

Sentence nr: 2
Links to Reddit may also contain offensive material.

Sentence nr: 3
President Donald Trump’s administration, in its turbulent first months, has drawn fire from both the left and the right, including the ACLU, government ethics accountability groups and former Bush administration officials.

Sentence nr: 4
But one group has shown nothing but unbridled enthusiasm for the president’s actions thus far: the over 380,000 members of r/The_Donald, one of the thousands of comment boards on Reddit, the fifth-most-popular website in the U.S.

Sentence nr: 5
The subreddit, where posters refer to President Trump as the “God Emperor” and “daddy,” is arguably the epicenter of Trump fervor on the internet.

Sentence nr: 6
Its membership has grown steadily since the 2016 presidential election, though its members were especially active during the campaign.

Sentence nr: 7
They mobilized to comb through the hacked Democratic National Committee emails published on WikiLeaks and played a large role in spreading information and theories about those emails.

Sentence nr: 8
More broadly, they waged the “Great Meme War”: an effort to get Trump elected by bombarding the internet with social-media-ready content promoting Trump or bashing Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton.

Sentence nr: 9
Some of those memes played on Clinton’s campaign gaffes, such as her use of the phrase “basket of deplorables,” while others involved an emerging pro-Trump iconography centered around images of Pepe the Frog — a cartoon character with a convoluted history that gained especial prominence after it was co-opted by white nationalists as a sort of unofficial mascot.

Sentence nr: 10
Members of r/The_Donald like to say they “shitposted” Donald Trump into office; regardless of whether the flood of memes swung the election, it did overwhelm the front page of Reddit to such an extent that the site’s CEO rushed to deploy a change in Reddit’s algorithm that limits the influence of any single subreddit.1 What can we say about the animating force behind r/The_Donald?

Sentence nr: 11
For one, it’s not universal among Trump supporters; nearly 63 million Americans voted for Trump, and the 382,000 members of r/The_Donald represent less than 1 percent of that.

Sentence nr: 12
But in the subreddit’s vocal and dedicated membership, you can find an influential strain of Trump boosterism.

Sentence nr: 13
According to former staffers, the Trump campaign team monitored the subreddit for messages that resonated, and Trump himself participated in an “Ask Me Anything” on r/The_Donald in July.

Sentence nr: 14
Since the election, the subreddit has continued to serve as a conduit through which fringe conspiracy theories — often started on sites like 4chan.org, a freewheeling image-based message board best known for creating memes, posting stolen celebrity nudes and birthing the hacker collective Anonymous — enter a larger online discourse.

Sentence nr: 15
The most striking example has been “Pizzagate,” the false idea that a pizza parlor in Washington, D.C., is the center of a child-trafficking ring involving Clinton campaign manager John Podesta, which prompted a man from North Carolina to “self-investigate” the shop, where he fired a rifle several times and threatened an employee.

Sentence nr: 16
r/The_Donald has repeatedly been accused of offering a safe harbor where racists and white nationalists can congregate and express their views, much the same way that Trump’s campaign is said to have mobilized and emboldened those same groups.

Sentence nr: 17
And indeed, r/The_Donald is home to some pretty vile comment threads.

Sentence nr: 18
The subreddit’s moderators declined to talk to us about their community and accused FiveThirtyEight of being “fake news.” Regardless, we think there’s a way to get at the nature of r/The_Donald that is more rigorous than doing a quick scan of its comments (and certainly more objective than simply soliciting the opinions of the group’s fans and detractors).

Sentence nr: 19
We’ve adapted a technique that’s used in machine learning research — called latent semantic analysis — to characterize 50,323 active subreddits2 based on 1.4 billion comments posted from Jan. 1, 2015, to Dec. 31, 2016, in a way that allows us to quantify how similar in essence one subreddit is to another.

Sentence nr: 20
At its heart, the analysis is based on commenter overlap: Two subreddits are deemed more similar if many commenters have posted often to both.

Sentence nr: 21
This also makes it possible to do what we call “subreddit algebra”: adding one subreddit to another and seeing if the result resembles some third subreddit, or subtracting out a component of one subreddit’s character and seeing what’s left.

Sentence nr: 22
(There’s a detailed explanation of how this analysis works at the bottom of the article).

Sentence nr: 23
Here’s a simple example: Using our technique, you can add the primary subreddit for talking about the NBA (r/nba) to the main subreddit for the state of Minnesota (r/minnesota) and the closest result is r/timberwolves, the subreddit dedicated to Minnesota’s pro basketball team.

Sentence nr: 24
Similarly, you can take r/nba and subtract r/sports, and the result is r/Sneakers, a subreddit dedicated to the sneaker culture that is a prominent non-sport component of NBA fandom.

Sentence nr: 25
This may all seem pretty abstract, but that same algebra can be applied to r/The_Donald.

Sentence nr: 26
What happens when you break r/The_Donald up into subgroups using subreddit subtraction?

Sentence nr: 27
What happens when you add unrelated subreddits to r/The_Donald?

Sentence nr: 28
Before we get into those questions, let’s take a look at the subreddits that are most similar to r/The_Donald, according to our analysis3: 1.r/Conservative0.741Discussion of conservative philosophy 2.r/AskTrumpSupporters0.737Q&A with Trump supporters 3.r/HillaryForPrison0.675Extreme anti-Clinton commentary 4.r/uncensorednews0.661News with a focus on far-right-wing views 5.r/AskThe_Donald0.634Q&A subreddit run by r/The_Donald moderators r/Conservative and r/AskTrumpSupporters top the list, followed by r/HillaryForPrison, a subreddit that refers to Hillary Clinton by the pronoun “it” and notes in bold on the sidebar that “Putting It behind bars is fun!” After that it’s r/uncensorednews, a subreddit started by white nationalist moderators who found the existing, extremely popular r/news subreddit to be too liberal.

Sentence nr: 29
So does this mean that users who comment on r/The_Donald comment on r/Conservative more than any other subreddit?

Sentence nr: 30
No.

Sentence nr: 31
Eight percent of r/The_Donald’s users have also commented on r/Conservative, which is about one-fifth the size of r/The_Donald, and conversely, 51 percent of commenters on r/Conservative have commented on r/The_Donald.

Sentence nr: 32
But the raw number of shared commenters isn’t very informative on its own because, for example, almost every subreddit will have a lot of overlap with big, really popular subreddits such as r/AskReddit, which has over 16 million members.

Sentence nr: 33
Our analysis is a bit more subtle: We weight the overlaps in commenters according to, in essence, how surprising those overlaps are — that is, how much more two subreddits’ user bases overlap than we would expect them to based on chance alone.

Sentence nr: 34
Since essentially every subreddit overlaps heavily with super popular groups like r/AskReddit, that result is no longer surprising and gets a lower weight.

Sentence nr: 35
What rises to the top, then, are the more unlikely results that are characteristic of a specific subreddit rather than those that are common to Reddit as a whole.

Sentence nr: 36
And by looking at these weighted commenter overlap rankings across thousands of subreddits, we built a profile for each subreddit that helps capture what defines the average commenter on each specific subreddit.

Sentence nr: 37
There’s nothing too revealing in that list above — all of those subreddits are explicitly pro-Trump, anti-Clinton or politically conservative.

Sentence nr: 38
So let’s use subreddit algebra to dissect r/The_Donald into its constituent parts.

Sentence nr: 39
What happens when you filter out commenters’ general interest in politics?

Sentence nr: 40
To figure that out, we can subtract r/politics from r/The_Donald.

Sentence nr: 41
The result most closely matches r/fatpeoplehate, a now-banned subreddit that was dedicated to ridiculing and bullying overweight people.

Sentence nr: 42
r/The_Donald – r/politics = 1.r/fatpeoplehate0.275For sharing insults aimed at overweight people (now banned) 2.r/TheRedPill0.274Virulently misogynistic subreddit, nominally devoted to “sexual strategy” 3.r/Mr_Trump0.266Now-dormant subreddit formed during a moderator schism at r/The_Donald 4.r/coontown0.266Open and enthusiastic racism against black people (now banned) 5.r/4chan0.253Screenshots of 4chan.org posts Subreddit algebra isn’t quite as simple as A – B = C. It’s more like A – B is closer to C than anything else, but it’s also pretty similar to D and not far off from E. So when you subtract r/politics from r/The_Donald, you actually get a list of every subreddit in our analysis, ranked in order of their similarity to the result of that subtraction.

Sentence nr: 43
We’re showing just the top five.

Sentence nr: 44
And that top five isn’t exactly pretty, though it does support the theory that at least a subset of Trump’s supporters are motivated by racism.

Sentence nr: 45
The presence of r/fatpeoplehate at the top of the list echoes some of President Trump’s own behavior, including his referring to 1996 Miss Universe winner Alicia Machado as “Miss Piggy” and insulting Rosie O’Donnell about her weight.

Sentence nr: 46
The second-closest result, r/TheRedPill, describes itself in its sidebar as a place for “discussion of sexual strategy in a culture increasingly lacking a positive identity for men”; named after a scene from the “The Matrix,” the group believes that women run the world and men are an oppressed class, and from that belief springs an ideology that has been described as “the heart of modern misogyny.” r/Mr_Trump self-describes as “the #1 Alt-Right, most uncucked subreddit” — referring to a populist white-nationalist movement and an increasingly all-purpose insult meant to denigrate others’ masculinity — and the appallingly named r/coontown is the now-banned but previously central home to unrepentant racism on Reddit.

Sentence nr: 47
Finally, coming in at No.

Sentence nr: 48
5 is r/4chan, a subreddit dedicated to posting screenshots of threads found on 4chan, where many users supported Trump for president and where the /pol/ board in particular has a strongly racist bent.

Sentence nr: 49
We dissected r/The_Donald in a bunch of other ways using subreddit algebra.

Sentence nr: 50
Here are some of the more interesting results: r/The_Donald – r/conspiracy = 1.r/CFB0.269For college football discussion 2.r/nfl0.255For NFL discussion 3.r/TrumpMinnesota0.244Small subreddit for Trump supporters in Minnesota r/The_Donald + r/europe = 1.r/european0.781Now-private subreddit that hosted racist and anti-Semitic commentary on European affairs 2.r/worldnews0.768Main subreddit for discussion of world affairs 3.r/syriancivilwar0.688For discussion of the conflict in Syria r/The_Donald + r/Games = 1.r/KotakuInAction0.676Main hub of Gamergate discussion on Reddit 2.r/gaming0.619Largest general gaming subreddit 3.r/Cynicalbrit0.586Unofficial fanpage for the internet personality TotalBiscuit So even adding innocuous subreddits, such as r/europe and r/Games, to r/The_Donald can result in something ugly or hate-based — r/european frequently hosts anti-Semitism and racism, while r/KotakuInAction is Reddit’s main home for the misogynistic Gamergate movement.

Sentence nr: 51
Which raises a question: Are these hateful communities linked specifically to Trump’s supporters on Reddit, or are they common to politically active Reddit users in general?

Sentence nr: 52
To get at that question, let’s try subtracting r/politics from r/conservative: r/Conservative – r/politics = 1.r/Mary0.265Subreddit for devotees of the biblical Mary 2.r/RCIA0.264For those considering converting to Catholicism (RCIA means “rite of Christian initiation for adults”) 3.r/ak470.241For discussing the AK-47 rifle 4.r/TelaIgne0.240A space where Catholic redditors pray for other redditors (the name is Latin for “web on fire”) 5.r/ChristianJewishRoots0.240For discussion of the relationship between Christian and Jewish theology When we do this, we find that the top result is a subreddit dedicated to the glorification of a biblical Mary, and the other related subreddits are similarly focused on Christianity, except for r/ak47, which is dedicated to the famous rifle.

Sentence nr: 53
So what about the other 2016 presidential candidates?

Sentence nr: 54
How does Trump’s Reddit following compare to that of Hillary Clinton or Democratic primary candidate Bernie Sanders (whose r/SandersForPresident subreddit still has over 215,000 members)?

Sentence nr: 55
This analysis lets us take any subreddit and say how “Trump-ish” it is vs. how “Clinton-ish” or “Sanders-ish” it is.

Sentence nr: 56
Here’s a selection of subreddits plotted on a three-way spectrum from r/The_Donald to r/SandersForPresident to r/hillaryclinton.

Sentence nr: 57
Subreddits dedicated to politics and news are smack in the middle.

Sentence nr: 58
r/Feminism is on the Sanders/Clinton side of the spectrum, though slightly closer to Clinton, as is r/TheBluePill, a feminist parody of r/TheRedPill; r/BasicIncome (a subreddit advocating for a universal basic income) is also on the liberal side, though slightly closer to Sanders.

Sentence nr: 59
And all of those hate-based subreddits?

Sentence nr: 60
They’re decidedly in r/The_Donald’s corner.

Sentence nr: 61
How does this work?Latent semantic analysis (LSA) — the technique from natural language processing that we’ve adapted for this analysis — is often used to determine how related one book, article or speech is to another.

Sentence nr: 62
The basic idea is that documents using similar words with similar frequency are probably closely related.

Sentence nr: 63
But what about the words themselves?

Sentence nr: 64
LSA also allows you to assess how similar words are by looking at the other words that show up around them.

Sentence nr: 65
So, for example, two words that might rarely show up together (say “dog” and “cat”) but often have the same words nearby (such as “pet” and “vet”) are deemed closely related.

Sentence nr: 66
The way this works is that every word in, say, a book is assigned a value based on its co-occurrence with every other word in that book, and the result is a set of vectors — one for each word — that can be compared numerically.

Sentence nr: 67
On a very technical level, the way you determine how similar two words like “dog” and “cat” are is by looking at the angle between their two vectors (there’s a visual guide to understanding these concepts below).Vectors are interesting because they can be enormous, multidimensional things that contain a huge amount of information — but you can still use them to do grade-school arithmetic.

Sentence nr: 68
When machine-learning researchers at Google tried adding word vectors together or subtracting one from another, they discovered semantically meaningful relationships.4 For example, if you take the vector for “king,” subtract the vector for “man” and add the vector for “woman,” the closest result is the vector for “queen.” Slightly more subtle relationships were also exposed: e.g.

Sentence nr: 69
“Rome” plus “Germany” equals “Berlin.” It turned out to be a very powerful way of analyzing language.

Sentence nr: 70
Here, we are also using co-occurrence to try to uncover the nature of different subreddits and their relationships to one another.

