Sentence nr: 0
Mar.

Sentence nr: 1
30, 2016 at 1:23 PM How Trump Hacked The Media Trump’s dominance on cable news isn’t the whole story.

Sentence nr: 2
By Nate Silver Filed under 2016 Election Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/trump-news FacebookTwitterEmail Donald Trump took over the news cycle on Feb. 26, as he had so many times before.

Sentence nr: 3
In the morning, the media chatter was about Marco Rubio’s seemingly strong debate in Houston the previous evening in which he’d confronted Trump.

Sentence nr: 4
By midday, however, there were rumors and reports that Trump would be endorsed by New Jersey Gov.

Sentence nr: 5
Chris Christie.

Sentence nr: 6
Once Christie, who’d been flown to Trump’s event in Texas surreptitiously, delivered his endorsement late that afternoon, Rubio was swept off the front pages and relegated to sideshow status.

Sentence nr: 7
I remember getting into some arguments with my colleagues that afternoon.

Sentence nr: 8
Was Christie’s endorsement really so momentous that it required wall-to-wall coverage?

Sentence nr: 9
You can make a case that it was: Christie was the first sitting governor and the most mainstream Republican to have endorsed Trump to that point.

Sentence nr: 10
The case against: The endorsement was somewhat predictable based on Christie’s previous behavior toward Trump, and few of the hundreds of endorsements made during the campaign earn breaking-news chyrons.

Sentence nr: 11
The irony is that for such a “game-changing” event, Christie’s endorsement of Trump had a relatively short shelf life as the top news story.

Sentence nr: 12
By noon the next day, it was just one of a mishmash of headlines about the Republican campaign; there were others about the ongoing battle between Trump and the Republican “establishment,” and even one about how a pair of women who backed Trump on social media had accused Rubio of having a “gay lifestyle.” It was mission accomplished for Trump, however, who had changed the news cycle on his whim and prevented Rubio from sustaining any momentum of his own.

Sentence nr: 13
For all the recent debate about what responsibility the media bears for Trump’s rise to the top of the Republican Party’s nomination race, there hasn’t been a lot of evidence presented on how the media has actually covered the campaign.

Sentence nr: 14
So I scoured through more than nine months of headlines since Trump’s presidential bid began.

Sentence nr: 15
The Christie endorsement, it turns out, is emblematic of a larger pattern: Trump has been able to disrupt the news pretty much any time he wants, whether by being newsworthy, offensive, salacious or entertaining.

Sentence nr: 16
The media has almost always played along.

Sentence nr: 17
But that isn’t the only problem we found.

Sentence nr: 18
Trump has dominated the news, but that’s not the whole story.

Sentence nr: 19
Sunday marked the 286th day of Trump’s campaign, which began June 16.

Sentence nr: 20
From the start, he’s been a media phenomenon.

Sentence nr: 21
According to The New York Times, Trump has received the equivalent of $1.9 billion in television coverage while having spent only $10 million on paid advertising.

Sentence nr: 22
By contrast, Trump’s Republican rivals combined have received slightly less than $1.2 billion worth of television coverage, meaning that Trump has been the subject of the clear majority (62 percent) of candidate-focused TV coverage of the Republican race.

Sentence nr: 23
There’s a perception that Trump has dominated television coverage more than coverage in print or digital media outlets, but it’s not clear that’s true.

Sentence nr: 24
A study we conducted in December found that 54 percent of newspaper stories about the Republican candidates were about Trump, not that far from his share of TV coverage.

Sentence nr: 25
(For transparency’s sake: Among stories FiveThirtyEight has published where a Republican candidate’s name has appeared in the URL — which most often mirrors the headline — 43 percent have been about Trump.1) For a further sense of how digital outlets are covering the race, we can borrow a technique I’ve used in the past, which is to record the top story as of noon each day from the news aggregator Memeorandum.

Sentence nr: 26
The site uses an algorithm to determine which stories are leading political coverage on the Internet; the details of the calculation are somewhat opaque, but a lot of it is based on which stories are being linked to by other news organizations and what themes are commonly recurring among different news outlets.

Sentence nr: 27
Simply put, Memeorandum is a good indicator of what stories journalists are talking about.

Sentence nr: 28
Through Sunday, Trump had been the lead story on Memeorandum on 104 days, or 36 percent of the time since he announced his candidacy.

Sentence nr: 29
However, Trump is competing for coverage against not only other Republican candidates but also Democrats, along with other international and national news stories.2 Of the days when a story about the Republican campaign led Memeorandum, it was a Trump-related story 68 percent of the time.3 HOW OFTEN DID TRUMP LEAD NEWS COVERAGE OUT OF ALL DAYS … DAYS WHERE TRUMP LED COVERAGE TOTAL DAYS TRUMP’S FRACTION OF COVERAGE … since the start of his campaign on June 16, including days when the top story was not campaign-related?

Sentence nr: 30
104 286 36% … when a campaign-related story led the news?

Sentence nr: 31
104 200 52 … when a story about the Republican campaign led the news?

Sentence nr: 32
104 152 68 … when a story about a particular Republican candidate led the news?

Sentence nr: 33
104 137 76 Trump has dominated coverage of the GOP campaign, but not always all other news Importantly, this is a measure of which topics are gaining traction rather than how many stories on a particular topic are being published.

Sentence nr: 34
Then again, stories rank high on Memeorandum precisely because other journalists (and not just readers) are picking up on the same themes.

Sentence nr: 35
It’s safe to say that the GOP race has been covered principally as a Trump story across all forms of media.

Sentence nr: 36
But how much Trump has been covered is less interesting in some ways than how he’s been covered.

Sentence nr: 37
In fact, judging by what has been featured on Memeorandum, coverage of Trump has evolved over time, breaking down fairly neatly into three periods: In the summer, coverage of Trump was highly poll-driven, with most of it emphasizing how popular he was despite repeatedly making inflammatory remarks.

Sentence nr: 38
In the early fall, coverage of Trump slowed down considerably.

Sentence nr: 39
This coincided with a period when he was relatively subdued in debates and public appearances, and also fairly stagnant in the polls.

Sentence nr: 40
However, Trump again became a focal point after the Paris and San Bernardino terrorist attacks, which Trump used to exploit anti-Muslim and anti-immigrant sentiment.

Sentence nr: 41
In the winter (and so far in the early spring), the coverage of Trump has been manic.

Sentence nr: 42
He’s been the near-constant center of attention, but rarely has the media focused on any one Trump-related storyline for more than a day or two at a time.

Sentence nr: 43
We can consider these phases in more detail based on a series of charts designed by my colleague Reuben Fischer-Baum.

Sentence nr: 44
They illustrate whether the lead story at Memeorandum each day was about Trump and highlight three frequently occurring categories of Trump coverage: Polling.

Sentence nr: 45
There have been 29 days of coverage on Trump’s polls, making it the most frequently occurring Trump-related subject.

Sentence nr: 46
Trump versus the Republican Party.

Sentence nr: 47
There have been 22 days of coverage on Trump’s insurrection against the Republican Party “establishment.” These stories often involve excellent reporting.

Sentence nr: 48
Almost always, they frame the conflict as one between Trump and the Republican “party elites,” as opposed to considering divisions among Republican voters in their attitudes toward Trump.

Sentence nr: 49
Inflammatory comments.

Sentence nr: 50
And there have been 16 days of coverage about controversial comments made by Trump.

Sentence nr: 51
This category relates only to comments spoken, written or tweeted by Trump, as opposed to other types of Trump-related controversies.

Sentence nr: 52
For a more detailed breakdown of exactly which stories were leading coverage, you can download our spreadsheet here.

Sentence nr: 53
The Summer Of Trump: First the media missed Trump’s popularity, then it missed his unpopularity Here’s Reuben’s chart for the summer of Trump, which covers from Trump’s announcement of his candidacy June 164 through Sept. 22 of last year.

Sentence nr: 54
Trump’s entry into the campaign was initially treated dismissively — including by FiveThirtyEight — although it didn’t take that long for the tone of coverage to change.

Sentence nr: 55
Particularly after Trump belittled Sen. John McCain’s time as a prisoner of war and many news outlets predicted his immediate demise,5 but Trump’s polls continued rising instead, Trump developed a reputation for being a “Teflon candidate” who was relatively impervious to attack.

Sentence nr: 56
I’ve seen a lot of commentary to the effect that the press was slow to recognize the appeal of Trump to Republican voters.

Sentence nr: 57
Certainly there was a lot of variation among news outlets — with FiveThirtyEight being on the slower end to come around.

Sentence nr: 58
But overall, that hypothesis doesn’t hold up well once you review the evidence.

Sentence nr: 59
By early August, reporters were writing about how “Trump’s staying power [was] defying predictions of political doom” and how his top-line polling numbers among Republicans were evidence of his broad and surprising popularity.

Sentence nr: 60
Overall, in the summer, there were 13 days of coverage of Trump’s polls, more than the nine days spent on his questionable remarks.6 Furthermore, these poll-based stories were almost always7 positive for Trump.

Sentence nr: 61
Republican voters soon took away the message that Trump was not only their most likely nominee, but would also be a strong general election candidate, frequently naming him the “most electable” of their choices.

Sentence nr: 62
What was wrong with the media spending so much time citing Trump’s polls — which, after all, correctly showed him with a lead?

Sentence nr: 63
We (somewhat infamously) spent a lot of time arguing about this in the summer and fall.

Sentence nr: 64
Part of the issue is that polls have historically not been very predictive early in primary campaigns, as candidates such as Rudy Giuliani, Howard Dean, Herman Cain, Rick Perry and Hillary Clinton (in 2008) can attest.

Sentence nr: 65
If Trump and Clinton wind up winning their nominations this year after their early poll success, it will be the exception as much as the rule.

Sentence nr: 66
But the other reason is more particular to Trump, which is that the top-line poll numbers the media frequently cited don’t convey the whole polling story.

Sentence nr: 67
Trump has consistently had the plurality of Republican support in polls, but those same polls suggest that Trump faces unusually high resistance from voters who don’t have him as their first choice.

Sentence nr: 68
To some extent, that’s true among Republican voters.

Sentence nr: 69
Many of them would be unhappy with a Trump nomination, more than is typical for a polling front-runner, which is part of why Trump’s path to 1,237 delegates remains tenuous.

Sentence nr: 70
It’s more obviously and emphatically true of general election voters, with whom Trump has historically high negatives.

Sentence nr: 71
Trump’s weakness among general election voters has been evident for a long time — it’s not a new story, even though it has just recently started to get more coverage.

Sentence nr: 72
Put another way, the media may have been slow to recognize Trump’s popularity — it took a month or two after he launched his campaign.

Sentence nr: 73
But it was slower to recognize his unpopularity, and Trump is a profoundly unpopular candidate with the broader American public.

Sentence nr: 74
The Autumn Of Trump: A break in Trump coverage, then came Paris There are a few other twists in our story, however.

Sentence nr: 75
For instance, you might assume that Trump has dominated news coverage from wire to wire.

Sentence nr: 76
But there was a long period in the early fall when the news was not very focused on Trump.

Sentence nr: 77
In the 53-day period from Sept. 21 through Nov. 12, Trump was the lead story on Memeorandum only three times: What was the media covering instead?

Sentence nr: 78
There was some important non-campaign news: This period includes the narrowly averted government shutdown in late September and the nearly disastrous Republican House speakership transition in October.

Sentence nr: 79
Another frequent topic was the Democratic race.

Sentence nr: 80
Even though Clinton’s polling was quite a bit better than Trump’s — she had a much larger share of the Democratic vote than Trump had of the Republican vote, a larger lead over her nearest rivals than Trump had over his, and better (although nonetheless fairly poor) general election numbers — the media usually portrayed Clinton’s polling in a negative light.

Sentence nr: 81
There was also continuing coverage of the scandal surrounding her private email server and frequent speculation about Joe Biden entering the Democratic race.

Sentence nr: 82
By mid-October, after a strong debate for Clinton and after Biden confirmed he wouldn’t run, the Democratic race receded from the headlines.

Sentence nr: 83
But there’s been an interesting symbiosis between coverage of Clinton and coverage of Trump.

Sentence nr: 84
Clinton, who has tried to run a low-key, “prevent defense” type of campaign, has probably benefited from Trump eating up so many news cycles, while Bernie Sanders has probably been hurt by it.

Sentence nr: 85
In late October and early November, there was also a period of coverage of the Republican race that wasn’t Trump-centric.

Sentence nr: 86
A lot of this coverage focused on Ben Carson, who received four straight days of mostly tough coverage from Nov. 5 through Nov. 8.

Sentence nr: 87
But the more conventional candidates didn’t receive all that much attention.

Sentence nr: 88
From Trump’s entry into the race in June through the end of 2015, Rubio was the lead story on Memeorandum only three times, Jeb Bush also only three times and John Kasich zero times.

Sentence nr: 89
Scott Walker was the focal point just twice — on the day he entered the race and the day after he quit it.

Sentence nr: 90
If the non-Trump Republicans were having trouble gaining traction, it became harder after the terrorist attacks in Paris on Nov. 13 and in San Bernardino, California, on Dec. 2.

Sentence nr: 91
After a few days when coverage of the attacks themselves led the news, Trump made waves with his response, particularly on Dec. 7 when he called for a ban on Muslim immigration.

Sentence nr: 92
This period coincided with a renewed rise for Trump in national polls, which had been quite stagnant throughout the fall: Likewise, it coincided with a big increase in the amount of media coverage of Trump.

Sentence nr: 93
From Dec. 7 through Sunday, Trump was the lead story on Memeorandum on 57 of 112 days, or just slightly more than half the time, up from about 30 percent of the time beforehand.

Sentence nr: 94
Although the correlation is strong, the causal relationships between Trump’s spikes in the polls and those in his media coverage are hard to sort out, in part because they probably reinforce one another.

Sentence nr: 95
But it’s at least plausible that Paris and San Bernardino restarted the cycle of attention to Trump when it might slowly have petered out otherwise.

Sentence nr: 96
The Winter Of Trump: Manic coverage and panicked Republicans Since Dec. 22, Trump has led the news more than half the time, including one streak this month where he did so for 15 days in a row.

Sentence nr: 97
That’s partly because there’s been a lot of actual Trump-related news.

Sentence nr: 98
Among other things: lots of debates; the mostly ineffectual efforts by Republican “party elites” to stop Trump; and — since Feb. 1 — voting in Iowa, New Hampshire and other states, which has mostly gone well for Trump.

Sentence nr: 99
And yet, no individual story about Trump has led news coverage for more than two consecutive days.

Sentence nr: 100
(See here for a more detailed breakdown of topics.)

Sentence nr: 101
Some seemingly significant stories didn’t even make it that far.

Sentence nr: 102
When Trump canceled a rally in Chicago after clashes between supporters and protesters, it led Memeorandum for only one day.

Sentence nr: 103
The fact that Trump has frequently condoned violence against protesters has never led a day of coverage.

Sentence nr: 104
Christie’s endorsement of Trump led the news for only about half a day, as I mentioned.

Sentence nr: 105
Remember when Trump got into a fight with Pope Francis?

Sentence nr: 106
That story also led coverage for only half a day.

Sentence nr: 107
What stories have been missed?

Sentence nr: 108
You could push back against a few examples — the current lead story about the Trump campaign’s abusive treatment of reporter Michelle Fields is probably more interesting to the press than to the broader public, for instance.

Sentence nr: 109
But most of the Trump-related stories the media has covered have a lot of intrinsic news value.

Sentence nr: 110
It’s easy to defend breaking from Rubio’s post-debate buzz to cover the Christie endorsement, for example.

Sentence nr: 111
The problem is that the cumulative effect of always choosing the Trump story piles up.

Sentence nr: 112
There has been scant coverage of candidates other than Trump and Clinton — certainly including the other Republicans but also Sanders.

Sentence nr: 113
These candidates have not received all that much opportunity to build momentum after favorable events on the campaign trail.

Sentence nr: 114
Nor have they gotten all that much vetting or been subject to all that many investigative stories.

Sentence nr: 115
That may be part of why Rubio’s standing fluctuated so much during February and March, for example.

Sentence nr: 116
Voters hadn’t heard much about him: He’d led the news day only three times before February, according to Memeorandum.

Sentence nr: 117
So a relatively minor story, such as a strong or weak debate, could weigh strongly upon their opinion of him.

Sentence nr: 118
Another problem is that Trump is very often dictating the terms of his coverage, both by threatening to withdraw access from outlets that treat him unfavorably and by pre-empting other stories that might be unfavorable to him.

Sentence nr: 119
There are whole genres of Trump-related stories that remain underexplored.

Sentence nr: 120
According to Memeorandum, for example, at no point has an investigative story about Trump’s past business dealings led news coverage.

Sentence nr: 121
That doesn’t mean these stories haven’t been written — there have been some good ones — but they haven’t gained traction.

Sentence nr: 122
(And remember: Memeorandum placement is principally based on which stories are receiving inbound links from other news organizations, so we can’t just blame readers for not caring about those stories.)

Sentence nr: 123
Also, Trump’s policy flip-flops have rarely led the news.

Sentence nr: 124
How many Republicans know that Trump once called himself “very pro-choice,” or once promoted single-payer health care, or once called for a wealth tax?

Sentence nr: 125
I’ve seen it asserted that Republicans don’t care very much about these things, and that may be a reasonable supposition, but the theory has never really been tested because these stories have not received much emphasis.

Sentence nr: 126
Trump hacked the system Most of the media’s self-criticism of its Trump coverage has focused on whether Trump’s dominance of the news cycle reflects a craven desire for higher TV ratings or Web traffic numbers.

Sentence nr: 127
It’s fine to debate that — although these criticisms are sometimes being evinced through crocodile tears given the record ratings and traffic Trump is bringing to news organizations of all kinds.8 But this critique avoids some thornier questions.

Sentence nr: 128
For instance, with his ability to make news any time he wants with a tweet, news conference or conveniently placed leak, Trump has challenged news organizations’ editorial prerogative.

Sentence nr: 129
Should the press cover a candidate differently when he makes trolling the media an explicit part of his strategy, on the theory that some coverage is almost always better than none?

Sentence nr: 130
That’s not the only problem.

Sentence nr: 131
Trump also challenges the media’s notion of what it means to be “objective.” Among other things, Trump has frequently invoked misogyny and racism; he has frequently lied, and he has repeatedly encouraged violence against political protesters.

Sentence nr: 132
As far as we’re concerned at FiveThirtyEight, these are matters of fact and not opinion and to describe them otherwise would make our reporting less objective.

Sentence nr: 133
Other news outlets will bend over backward to avoid describing them in those terms, however.

Sentence nr: 134
An underappreciated problem is that Trump’s candidacy is relatively lacking in precedent, which means we’re all trying to figure this out as we go along.

Sentence nr: 135
Traditional journalists have had trouble covering Trump, but so have empirically-minded ones like us here at FiveThirtyEight.

Sentence nr: 136
We laid long odds against Trump getting this far, in large part because no similar presidential candidate has done so since primary and caucus voting became widespread in 1972.

Sentence nr: 137
Put another way, Trump has hacked the system and exposed the weaknesses in American political institutions.

Sentence nr: 138
He’s uncovered profound flaws in the Republican Party.

Sentence nr: 139
He’s demonstrated that third-rail issues like racism and nationalism can still be a potent political force.

Sentence nr: 140
He’s exploited the media’s goodwill and taken advantage of the lack of trust the American public has in journalism.

Sentence nr: 141
Trump may go away — he’s not yet assured of winning the GOP nomination, and he’ll be an underdog in November if he does — but the problems he’s exposed were years in the making, and they’ll take years to sort out.

Sentence nr: 142
Listen to the latest episode of the FiveThirtyEight politics podcast.

Sentence nr: 143
By Nate Silver More: Apple Podcasts | ESPN App | RSS | Embed Embed Code <iframe frameborder="0" width="100%" height="180" style="margin:20px auto 25px;max-width:600px;" scrolling="no" src="https://fivethirtyeight.com/player/politics/22588832/"></iframe>

