Sentence nr: 0
Apr.

Sentence nr: 1
21, 2017 at 11:14 AM When Scientists Donate To Politicians, It’s Usually To Democrats By Ben Wieder Filed under Campaign Finance Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/science-giving FacebookTwitterEmail Rep. Bill Foster, a Democrat from Illinois, is a former physicist.

Sentence nr: 2
Bill Clark / CQ Roll Call When Rep. Bill Foster first decided to run for Congress in 2007, he did what many aspiring politicians do: He asked his friends for money.

Sentence nr: 3
For the Illinois Democrat, a former physicist at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, many of those friends were scientists.

Sentence nr: 4
They gave generously and have continued to give generously in his subsequent five elections.

Sentence nr: 5
In fact, no candidate for U.S. Congress has raised more over the past 10 years from self-identified scientists and engineers than Foster, who took in $1.8 million in that time, according to an analysis of Federal Election Commission data.

Sentence nr: 6
“I am deep in the pocket of scientific truth,” Foster joked.

Sentence nr: 7
On Saturday, Foster plans to join the thousands of scientists and supporters of science who will take to the National Mall in Washington and to the streets in more than 400 communities across the world to assert the importance of science and protest American policies they see as detrimental to the field and to society.

Sentence nr: 8
The march, organized in the wake of communication restrictions imposed by President Trump’s administration on government scientists and proposed federal budget cuts to scientific funding, has been described as an unprecedented moment of political engagement by the scientific community.

Sentence nr: 9
But scientists, such as those who donated to Foster, don’t necessarily keep politics at arm’s length to begin with.

Sentence nr: 10
Over the past 10 years, FEC data shows, scientists and engineers have given more than $140 million to federal candidates and parties, with nearly 60 percent of that going to Democratic candidates and party committees.

Sentence nr: 11
This analysis considered donations to candidate committees and political parties by individual donors whose self-identified occupation fell within the disciplines of science, mathematics and engineering1 as identified by the National Science Foundation.

Sentence nr: 12
Social scientists were excluded for the purpose of this analysis.

Sentence nr: 13
The analysis also excluded donations to candidate-affiliated leadership and joint-fundraising committees as well as independent political groups, which often aren’t affiliated with a particular party.

Sentence nr: 14
Donation amounts were adjusted for inflation to 2016 dollars.

Sentence nr: 15
You can find the data on GitHub here.

Sentence nr: 16
Over the past decade, the scientific community has shown a willingness to support candidates with a science background.

Sentence nr: 17
Seven of the 10 U.S. House candidates who received the most support from the scientific community have at least a bachelor’s degree in science or engineering, according to the analysis.

Sentence nr: 18
After Foster, California Democrat Jerry McNerney, an engineer with a doctorate in mathematics, raised the second-largest amount: more than $460,000.

Sentence nr: 19
But scientists often abstain from political involvement, said Rush Holt, a former eight-term member of Congress and president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the largest professional organization of scientists in the world.

Sentence nr: 20
Holt said that scientists avoid the political public square because they think it goes beyond their scope of expertise or worry that it could affect their funding or their ability to perform their work objectively.

Sentence nr: 21
But he thinks those concerns are overblown.

Sentence nr: 22
“Scientists shouldn’t kid themselves in thinking that politics is dirty and science is pure and therefore tell themselves that they’re above politics,” Holt said.

Sentence nr: 23
When the scientific community does donate, presidential contenders have been the biggest beneficiaries, and scientists have handily favored Democratic candidates during the past three presidential contests.

Sentence nr: 24
Barack Obama topped the list, taking in nearly $18 million from scientists and engineers during his two campaigns.

Sentence nr: 25
Obama received more money in each of his elections than Hillary Clinton received in her unsuccessful bid last year.

Sentence nr: 26
Among Republicans, Mitt Romney raised the most, taking in more than $3.8 million in 2012.

Sentence nr: 27
Last year, the scientific community — which includes politically generous engineers and geologists in Texas — gave more to Texas Sen. Ted Cruz’s campaign for president than they did to Trump’s.

Sentence nr: 28
Sen. Elizabeth Warren, of Massachusetts, and Wisconsinite Russ Feingold, both Democrats, have received the most support from scientists and engineers among Senate candidates — with roughly $600,000 going to Warren and more than $450,000 to Feingold over the past decade.

Sentence nr: 29
Cruz and Scott Brown, who served in Massachusetts and lost a bid in New Hampshire, have been the top Republican Senate recipients, each taking in more than $375,000.

Sentence nr: 30
Scientists certainly aren’t as active as some other professions when it comes to political donations.

Sentence nr: 31
They gave less than both self-identified doctors2 and lawyers,3 even though there are more than four times as many scientists and engineers as either doctors or lawyers in the U.S., according to the most recent data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Sentence nr: 32
Doctors gave roughly 90 percent more to political candidates and parties between 2007 and 2016 than scientists and engineers.

Sentence nr: 33
Lawyers gave more in the 2016 cycle alone than scientists and engineers gave during the entire 10-year period.

Sentence nr: 34
And despite increased engagement by the scientific community now, political giving was only 3 percent higher in 2016 than in 2008, the last presidential election with no incumbent running, though the giving skewed more Democratic in 2016 than in any other cycle in the past 10 years.

Sentence nr: 35
You won’t find a lot of scientists in Congress.

Sentence nr: 36
Foster is the only member with a doctoral degree in a scientific field.

Sentence nr: 37
Two other House members have worked as scientists,4 and seven members of the House and one senator have worked as engineers,5 according to the Congressional Research Service.

Sentence nr: 38
Foster said Congress could use more members with scientific expertise.

Sentence nr: 39
He points to technical guidance he provided to fellow politicians during deliberations over the Iran nuclear deal as an example of the kind of specialized knowledge scientists bring to politics.

Sentence nr: 40
“Almost all significant decisions that we face have a technological component,” he said.

Sentence nr: 41
Shaughnessy Naughton, a Pennsylvania Democrat and former drug researcher, wants to see more scientists take the plunge into politics.

Sentence nr: 42
Naughton, who lost her races for the U.S. House in 2014 and 2016, has started a political nonprofit called 314 Action whose goal is to persuade scientists to run for office and to provide financial support.

Sentence nr: 43
“I think there is growing understanding in the scientific community that we need to go beyond signing petitions and letters and get involved in electoral politics,” she said.

Sentence nr: 44
Naughton’s group, which counts veteran Democratic strategist Joe Trippi among its board members, held a training session Thursday in Washington for scientists considering a run for office.

Sentence nr: 45
The group says 80 prospective candidates attended the session.

Sentence nr: 46
The group currently supports only Democratic candidates, though Naughton said she hopes to establish a separate fund to support Republicans.

Sentence nr: 47
“When you look at the party platforms, particularly on climate change, there’s a stark difference,” Naughton said.

Sentence nr: 48
“We felt like we had to pick a side.” That’s in line with many scientists’ politics: Four out of five scientists identify as Democrats, according to a 2014 Pew Research Center survey of American Association for the Advancement of Science members, and more than half describe themselves as liberal or very liberal.

Sentence nr: 49
Comparatively, political givers in the scientific community skew less Democratic.

Sentence nr: 50
That could be partly explained by differences between political donors and the rest of the population.

Sentence nr: 51
An analysis of top political givers in 2014 by the Center for Responsive Politics found that people who donate to politics tended to be slightly more Republican overall.

Sentence nr: 52
But variations between scientific disciplines also account for some of the difference.

Sentence nr: 53
Engineers were responsible for more than 70 percent of the overall giving by the scientific community from 2007 through 2016, and they showed a smaller preference for Democratic candidates and parties, giving 52 percent to Democrats and 46 percent to Republicans.

Sentence nr: 54
From 2009 through 2014, engineers gave more to Republican candidates and party groups than Democrats.

Sentence nr: 55
While scientists accounted for less than 25 percent of total giving over the past decade, more than 70 percent of their money went to Democratic candidates and groups.

Sentence nr: 56
Despite the political leanings of scientists, nearly two-thirds of American adults don’t think that scientists have an ideological slant, according to a 2014 Pew survey.

Sentence nr: 57
The findings were consistent with the same survey five years earlier.

Sentence nr: 58
Some in the scientific community worry that increased political activity and Saturday’s march could politicize science and make it a more partisan issue.

Sentence nr: 59
“It’s something I worry about a lot,” Foster said.

Sentence nr: 60
“It shouldn’t be.” Organizers say the march is nonpartisan, and they have chosen not to invite politicians to speak during the event.

Sentence nr: 61
They emphasize that the march goes beyond particular grievances with the Trump administration.

Sentence nr: 62
“Anti-science policies have been enacted by people on both sides of the aisle for a very long time,” Caroline Weinberg, a health researcher and an organizer of the march, said at a recent event in Washington.

Sentence nr: 63
“Acting as though this is a new thing is giving too much credit to this administration.”

