Sentence nr: 0
Apr.

Sentence nr: 1
30, 2014 at 9:20 AM Which States Are in the South?

Sentence nr: 2
By Walt Hickey Filed under Regionalism Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/region-survey FacebookTwitterEmail The Atlanta skyline at dusk.

Sentence nr: 3
Marc Perrella On Tuesday, we published the results of a SurveyMonkey Audience poll about which states people think compose the Midwest.

Sentence nr: 4
The answer is, essentially, that nobody seems to know — not even self-avowed Midwesterners.

Sentence nr: 5
So keep arguing.

Sentence nr: 6
We also asked SurveyMonkey to run a subsequent poll to determine which states are in the South.

Sentence nr: 7
Despite a lot of debate about that question as well, these results were more conclusive.

Sentence nr: 8
Although I think the South starts a few miles north of Baltimore, I am — according to self-identified Southerners — very wrong.

Sentence nr: 9
The survey isolated 1,135 respondents who identified “a lot” or “some” as a Southerner and asked them which states are in the South.

Sentence nr: 10
To get this sample, SurveyMonkey Audience polled 2,528 individuals, about half from a national sample and about half from states considered regionally South, according to the Census Bureau (Florida, Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, Delaware, Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee, Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Texas.)

Sentence nr: 11
Here are the percent of respondents identifying each state as Southern: Again, there are several takeaways.

Sentence nr: 12
First, the Southerners were considerably more certain of which states are their own.

Sentence nr: 13
While the top few Midwest states barely pulled 80 percent of the vote, nearly 90 percent of respondents identified Georgia and Alabama as Southern, and more than 80 percent placed Mississippi and Louisiana in the South.

Sentence nr: 14
South Carolina, Tennessee, Florida and North Carolina all garnered above 60 percent.

Sentence nr: 15
Southerners seem remarkably content to mess with Texas, giving it 57 percent support.

Sentence nr: 16
Virginia, Arkansas and Kentucky hovered at about 50 percent.

Sentence nr: 17
Also, Maryland — well and truly — is not a Southern state, according to actual Southerners.

Sentence nr: 18
It pulled a pathetic 6 percent of the vote.

Sentence nr: 19
That’s worse than Arizona and New Mexico.

Sentence nr: 20
Walter White is more Southern than a Marylander.

Sentence nr: 21
Allow me to welcome you to the North, Maryland.

Sentence nr: 22
I’ve always loved your well-appointed Interstate 95 rest stops!

Sentence nr: 23
Consistent with a tradition of skepticism of the federal government, the South further disagrees with the census designation of what’s in the South.

Sentence nr: 24
In addition to Maryland, Oklahoma and West Virginia both pulled less than 25 percent support, despite the fact that the census says they’re the South.

Sentence nr: 25
Take that, big government.

Sentence nr: 26
So, what have we learned?

Sentence nr: 27
Judging by some of the feedback on Tuesday’s blog post, people don’t know exactly where these places are, but they’re certainly passionate about it.

Sentence nr: 28
Also, does anyone know what’s going on with Missouri?

Sentence nr: 29
Mostly excluded from the South and Midwest, it appears to be the geographic equivalent of the last kid picked during dodgeball.

