Sentence nr: 0
Jul.

Sentence nr: 1
3, 2017 at 10:01 AM How Americans Order Their Steak By Walt Hickey and Rachael Dottle Filed under Food FacebookTwitterEmail Are people who prefer their steaks well done just wrong?

Sentence nr: 2
It’s the question that has divided a nation that is otherwise firmly united on the “steak is great” front, given that we Americans consume about 25 billion pounds of beef annually.

Sentence nr: 3
It makes ordering at steakhouses for large parties a negotiation; it causes effete elitists like me to reconsider the measure of a diner; and I’m going to guess that the BTUs of gas spent taking perfectly good rare steaks to well done amount to an environmental catastrophe.

Sentence nr: 4
A May 2014 investigation from this very website — one which, by my own admission, began as a campaign to smear those who enjoyed well-done beef — found that when people self-reported their steak preferences, most said medium-rare, followed by medium and then medium-well.

Sentence nr: 5
But that’s just what people say they like.

Sentence nr: 6
We’re living in a society where meat doneness preference has been used as a political cudgel against the holder of the highest office in the U.S. We have to get to the tender, marbled meat of the issue.

Sentence nr: 7
Longhorn Steakhouse hooked us up here, agreeing to share aggregated data about how Americans prefer their steak.

Sentence nr: 8
Longhorn shared a year’s worth of steak orders1 from all of its 491 U.S. locations, revealing how Americans ordered all different cuts of steak.

Sentence nr: 9
It turns out that Americans claim to like their steak a lot rarer than they actually do!2 There are serious differences in how people order different cuts, and we wanted to know why.

Sentence nr: 10
“Every steak has a different fiber,” said Jens Dahlmann, the executive chef at Longhorn.

Sentence nr: 11
“If you look at the most tender steak, it’s the tenderloin.

Sentence nr: 12
That’s a steak that lends itself to barely cooking it.

Sentence nr: 13
It’s got a very soft fiber and very sweet flavors to it.

Sentence nr: 14
It works great for rare and medium-rare.” Prime rib also works great on the rarer side.

Sentence nr: 15
Because it’s cooked slowly and at low temperatures, a rare order of prime rib can come out without the bloodiness that turns off many rare-averse people.

Sentence nr: 16
Other steaks can handle more heat.

Sentence nr: 17
“Steaks that still perform very well even if you go to a medium-well temperature, those would be the highly marbled steaks, the ribeye, even the porterhouse or T-bone,” Dahlmann said.

Sentence nr: 18
“There is a bone running through the middle, and around the bone retains more moisture and flavor.” David Berson, director of operations at Peter Luger Steak House in Brooklyn, agreed.

Sentence nr: 19
“Some people like a ribeye rare, but I would recommend cooking it a little longer.

Sentence nr: 20
It’s got a lot of fat.” One way cooks can get a leg up is to buy thicker cuts of beef, which gives them more margin for error than the thin cuts most supermarkets sell.

Sentence nr: 21
“For home cooks it’s important to get the highest quality they can,” Berson said.

Sentence nr: 22
“With protein — fish, beef — you don’t want to cut corners.” Meat buying is a big part of the job at Luger’s.

Sentence nr: 23
“We look for fat distribution or marbling,” Berson said.

Sentence nr: 24
“That’ll be a good indication of how juicy the steaks will be.” Dahlmann suggests that home cooks invest in a high-quality meat thermometer to nail the perfect doneness every time.

Sentence nr: 25
Any steak with an internal temperature from 95 degrees to 105 degrees Fahrenheit is rare, anything from 115 to 125 degrees is medium-rare and, according to FiveThirtyEight culture writer and cantankerous elitist Walt Hickey, anything above that is ruined.

