Sentence nr: 0
Jun.

Sentence nr: 1
10, 2015 at 9:16 AM The Most Common Unisex Names In America: Is Yours One Of Them?

Sentence nr: 2
By Andrew Flowers Filed under Names Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/unisex-names FacebookTwitterEmail Riley Curry, Riley Cooper and Riley Keough Getty Casey, Riley, Jessie and Jackie.

Sentence nr: 3
Peyton, Jody, Kerry and Pat.

Sentence nr: 4
Are these men or women?

Sentence nr: 5
It can be hard to say because these names are pretty much unisex.

Sentence nr: 6
Take Riley, for example.

Sentence nr: 7
Nearly 155,000 living Americans are named Riley, and the male-to-female ratio is pretty balanced, with a 51 percent to 49 percent split.

Sentence nr: 8
If Riley rings a bell, it may be because you saw a recent video of Riley Curry, the adorable 2-year-old daughter of NBA MVP Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors, at a post-game press conference.

Sentence nr: 9
Or perhaps you’re thinking of Riley Cooper, the wide receiver for the Philadelphia Eagles.

Sentence nr: 10
That’s the thing: Riley is neither a man’s name nor a woman’s.

Sentence nr: 11
It’s both.

Sentence nr: 12
It turns out that nearly 1 percent of Americans (or 1 in 109) have a unisex name, which means that at least one-third of newborns given that name were male and at least one-third were female.

Sentence nr: 13
It’s hard to say what the “most” unisex name is, but the chart below lists the 20 most common unisex names, ranked by the total number of people with that name.

Sentence nr: 14
Building off work done with my colleague Mona Chalabi, I used over 100 years of data from the Social Security Administration to create this list of the most androgynous names.

Sentence nr: 15
(The SSA has data on names given to at least five people, but I set my minimum threshold at 100 people to make sure that a name was prevalent enough to determine whether it was actually unisex.)

Sentence nr: 16
Using actuarial tables, also from the SSA, I adjusted the names data to approximate the number of people currently living with each name.

Sentence nr: 17
(This was similar to a method my colleagues Allison McCann and Nate Silver used in a previous story.)

Sentence nr: 18
For a name to make the top 20 cut, at least 25,000 people currently alive in America had to have it.

Sentence nr: 19
Nearly 3 million people have one of the more than 900 names in the searchable table below.

Sentence nr: 20
The “gap” column shows the difference in the male and female shares.

Sentence nr: 21
The lower the number, the more evenly balanced the name is between the sexes (with a minimum value of zero and maximum of about 33.33).

Sentence nr: 22
The SSA does not edit its list of names and as a result records a number of what are most likely placeholder names.

Sentence nr: 23
We were able to identify five of these (Unknown, Unnamed, Infant, Infantof and Notnamed) and removed them from the data.

Sentence nr: 24
Others, like Baby and Child, we thought were more ambiguous and so left them in.

Sentence nr: 25
You can explore the code behind this analysis, as well as the full data set, at GitHub.

Sentence nr: 26
CLARIFICATION (June 10, 2:27 p.m.): An earlier version of the searchable table of unisex names in this article excluded two likely placeholder names (Unknown and Unnamed) but should have excluded three more (Infant, Infantof and Notnamed).

Sentence nr: 27
We’ve now taken those out of the data, too, and added an explanation.

