Sentence nr: 0



Jun.

Sentence nr: 1
6, 2014
						at
						6:05 AM



							What Ethan Swan Learned From Tracking Every Tattoo in the NBA						



By Mike Wilson
Filed under Tattoos

Get the data on GitHub
GitHub data at data/nba-tattoos



FacebookTwitterEmail  













			Chris Andersen.

Sentence nr: 2
Getty Images


				Ethan Swan.

Sentence nr: 3
Allison Michael Orenstein



Ethan Swan and I couldn’t see the players’ tattoos from Section 217 of the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, but Swan still knew who was inked and who wasn’t.

Sentence nr: 4
LeBron James?

Sentence nr: 5
Obviously.

Sentence nr: 6
Chris Bosh?

Sentence nr: 7
A swirl of images (musical notes, tiger, skull) on his back.

Sentence nr: 8
Deron Williams?

Sentence nr: 9
“He’s got a basketball tattoo,” Swan said — just as at least one player on every NBA team did at one point three years ago.

Sentence nr: 10
Of the Nets on the floor in this early May playoff game, only Shaun Livingston was a blank canvas.

Sentence nr: 11
Except nobody really is — not any of us, and certainly not Swan.

Sentence nr: 12
For four seasons, he has kept a database of NBA players’ tattoos — every Chinese letter, Bible verse, jersey number, Rolls Royce logo and winged angel.

Sentence nr: 13
He puts it all on his Tumblr, his way of getting in the game.

Sentence nr: 14
But “NBA tattoos” is more than a fanboy project; it’s an antidote to an Internet rife with articles, lists and superlatives mocking athletes’ tattoo choices: 11 worst, 22 worst, ugliest.

Sentence nr: 15
Swan’s blog is a small protest against that kind of reflexive judgment.

Sentence nr: 16
“It’s just dumb to have an opinion about this,” he said.

Sentence nr: 17
“You don’t have enough ways to judge a player, you have to assert this thing that’s totally meaningless.”
Take Randy Foye of the Denver Nuggets, a guy who, Swan wrote, has “one of the most heartbreaking tattoos in the league (or that I’ve heard of, period).” As the game unfolded below us, Swan told me the story.

Sentence nr: 18
Foye’s father died when he was 3 years old, and after Randy finished kindergarten his mother walked out on the family.

Sentence nr: 19
On his 22nd birthday, Foye had her picture tattooed on his chest.

Sentence nr: 20
“If my mom was here today, she would probably be the most important person in my life,” Foye once told an interviewer.

Sentence nr: 21
“I just felt as if I needed something of her attached to me, so I just put her over my heart.”
Even in the dark of Section 217, I could see the story moved Swan.

Sentence nr: 22
“How,” he asked, “could you root against a guy like that?”
And yet the verdicts keep coming in.

Sentence nr: 23
A few years ago, Swan encountered his bête noire, a piece on Yahoo that used data to argue that players with visible tattoos were egotistical ball hogs and guys without them were selfless rebounders and passers.

Sentence nr: 24
Ethan Swan, defender of the NBA tattoo, was worried.

Sentence nr: 25
What if he was rooting for the wrong guys?

Sentence nr: 26
Ethan Swan | Allison Michael Orenstein 

Swan, 38, has tattoos on his belly, arms and chest, trimmed hair, and a quiet manner that gives the impression he’s more at ease listening than talking.

Sentence nr: 27
His day job has nothing to do with the NBA — he manages a gallery and performance space called 356 South Mission Road in Los Angeles.

Sentence nr: 28
Before that, he lived in New York and worked in the education department at the New Museum of Contemporary Art.1 When one of my colleagues found his blog I got interested in what inspired it.

Sentence nr: 29
Swan learned early about the importance of empathy.

Sentence nr: 30
He grew up in Rochester, New York, one of three children of activist parents.

Sentence nr: 31
His father volunteered for the Peace Corps and became a teacher; his mother is a nurse practitioner and HIV educator.

Sentence nr: 32
Swan found his own revolution in the punk community, where empathy for everyone else’s angst nestles just below the outrage.

Sentence nr: 33
He traded tapes and zines with friends across the country, urged his favorite bands to come to Rochester and featured their records in the store where he worked.

Sentence nr: 34
The impulse to share helped drive his decision to catalog tattoos.

Sentence nr: 35
“I was spending so much time watching basketball, I think it was important to find a way to participate, to not just be a spectator,” he said.

Sentence nr: 36
“I wouldn’t say much of that was conscious, but looking back at the other work I’ve done in my life, it clearly fits a pattern.”
In the early 2000s, he lived in Philadelphia and rooted for the 76ers, led by Allen Iverson, whose shoulder bore a cross of daggers and the words “Only The Strong Survive.” (Iverson once said, “I put shit on my body that means something to me.”2) Tattoos were still edgy then, and the NBA worried about whether its largely white fan base would accept tattooed black players.

Sentence nr: 37
At one point the league altered the cover of its Hoop magazine so Iverson’s body ink wouldn’t show.

Sentence nr: 38
Later, it instituted a “business casual” dress code for its players.

Sentence nr: 39
The response from the man known as The Answer: “They’re targeting guys who dress like me — guys who dress hip-hop.

Sentence nr: 40
Put a murderer in a suit and he’s still a murderer.”
That was when Swan saw a connection between basketball and punk.

Sentence nr: 41
Iverson’s tattoos obscured the person beneath them — he was an archetype, in other words, of the players Swan was most drawn to.

Sentence nr: 42
“He was just so defiant.

Sentence nr: 43
I loved it.”

 
Trevor Ariza | Getty Images 

The tattoo database came early in 2011, after Swan bought a subscription to stream games on his computer.

Sentence nr: 44
He watched with his laptop open to a spreadsheet.

Sentence nr: 45
He learned it was easiest to see a tattoo when a player shot free throws because he stood still and the camera zoomed in.

Sentence nr: 46
Swan searched the web for photos of tattooed players.

Sentence nr: 47
He followed athletes on Twitter so he’d know when they got new ink.

Sentence nr: 48
He set up a Google alert for “NBA tattoos.” One day, the IT guy at the New Museum confronted him about why he had searched so often for “Carmelo Anthony shirtless.”
Swan posted his first complete list of tattoos that May.

Sentence nr: 49
He counted 433 players in the NBA — 230 with tattoos and 203 without.

Sentence nr: 50
That’s 53 percent of players.

Sentence nr: 51
The next year the tattooed percentage rose to 55, and the year after that to 56.

Sentence nr: 52
Swan saw every banal and predictable tattoo imaginable.

Sentence nr: 53
But he also knew that a tattoo often documented something important.

Sentence nr: 54
Chris Andersen of the Miami Heat, whose upper-body art makes him look like he’s wearing a freaky turtleneck, covered himself in ink after recovering from drug addiction.

Sentence nr: 55
The Atlanta Hawks’ Demarre Carroll has an RIP portrait tattoo in memory of a brother who died from a brain tumor.

Sentence nr: 56
Trevor Ariza of the Washington Wizards honors his brother Tajh, who died in a fall from a hotel window at 5 years old.

Sentence nr: 57
Early on, Swan analyzed each team’s tattoos in a brief essay.

Sentence nr: 58
Of the New York Knicks he wrote:
For whatever reason, [they] ended up tied with the Lakers for most tattooed players on one team in 2010-11, and that’s without Eddy Curry.

Sentence nr: 59
Or Wilson Chandler, Nate Robinson, Starbury, Al Harrington, Quentin Richardson, or any of the other heavily tattooed guys to wear a Knicks uniform in the last few years.

Sentence nr: 60
I have no idea what’s driving it, but it does make me happy.

Sentence nr: 61
More recently, Swan has limited his remarks to individual players: “Among [Al] Harrington’s many tattoos is a great snarling wolf on his chest with the text ‘Killer Instinct.’”
Swan made an exception to this just-the-facts approach in 2012, when Grantland3 published a piece called “The Boy With the Dragon Tattoo — And other horrible ink in the NBA.” It was a list of player tattoos followed by quips written by the authors, who were screenwriters.

Sentence nr: 62
“This is just a reminder for the medics that he has a peanut allergy,” they wrote about Mo Williams’s Mr. Peanut collage.

Sentence nr: 63
For the Abe Lincoln tattoo on DeShawn Stevenson’s neck — one of the most-mocked tats in the league — one writer cracked, “When you play for the Nets it’s more about the Lincolns than the Benjamins.”
Swan took to his keyboard:
The real disappointment was the way in which the tattoos were used as a method to further distance players from spectators.

Sentence nr: 64
The authors … treated the tattoos as another line between themselves and the players mentioned, evidence that the players are ignorant or out of touch.

Sentence nr: 65
Why would you want to do that?

Sentence nr: 66
I asked Swan what he thought about Stevenson’s Lincoln tattoo.

Sentence nr: 67
“Look, he is a problematic dude,” he said.

Sentence nr: 68
“His tattoos are bonkers, he gets arrested, he wore a T-shirt saying, ‘LeBron, how’s my Dirk taste?’ But you know, he barely knew his father.

Sentence nr: 69
“The world is so — it will just break your heart.

Sentence nr: 70
The world is just so gnarly.

Sentence nr: 71
It’s not that he deserves a pass or isn’t responsible for his actions.

Sentence nr: 72
But how many times are people going to sit down and try to think of a way to make a joke about his tattoo?

Sentence nr: 73
There’s this whole other story that can be told about him and his reality.”
Only a few people noticed what Swan was doing.4 Once, somebody on Reddit linked to his blog with the headline, “NBA Tattoo Percentages per team, somebody did this research!” Inked magazine gave him an assignment to interview Dorell Wright, then of the Sixers, who has “G.H.O.S.T.” tattooed on his shoulder.

Sentence nr: 74
“It’s something me and one of my closest friends thought of,” Wright told Swan.

Sentence nr: 75
“Go Hard Or Stop Trying.”
Swan has never spoken to another NBA player.

Sentence nr: 76
He doesn’t often try to contact them on Twitter, doesn’t write to NBA or team spokespeople to get information.

Sentence nr: 77
Near the end of each season he simply Googles every player and the word tattoo.

Sentence nr: 78
He describes this task as “not un-fun.”
This season, by Swan’s count, 241 players had tattoos, down from 250 the year before.

Sentence nr: 79
He was a little disappointed.

Sentence nr: 80
He likes it when the numbers go up.

Sentence nr: 81
DeShawn Stevenson | Getty Images 

At the Nets-Heat game in May, I asked Swan about his own tattoos.

Sentence nr: 82
He lifted his shirt and undershirt and showed me one on his belly — a misshapen tattoo of a ghost.

Sentence nr: 83
He opened the top buttons of his shirt and revealed an image of a pet rabbit that had died.

Sentence nr: 84
The bunny is wrapped in a ribbon that says, “My Warm Heart.”
He has eight others.

Sentence nr: 85
Inside his right arm: “alas,” his sister Abigail’s initials.

Sentence nr: 86
Right shoulder: a heart.

Sentence nr: 87
Left shoulder: a polar bear taken from this album cover.

Sentence nr: 88
Right arm: “138,” a song about violence by the punk band the Misfits.

Sentence nr: 89
Left belly: another rabbit, this one homemade.

Sentence nr: 90
Left hip: the words “baby foxes.” Left chest: “absent friends.” Finally, inside his left arm: a rooster that matches one his sister Jordana got years ago.

Sentence nr: 91
Jordana, five years younger than her brother, shared a lot of his interests: art history, punk rock, travel.

Sentence nr: 92
In 2005 they spent a month bicycling across France together, sleeping on riverbanks and sometimes encountering sketchy people who eyed their expensive bikes.

Sentence nr: 93
Jordana’s tattoo helped keep them safe.

Sentence nr: 94
In France, Le Coq Gaulois has represented the aspirations of the people since the Revolution.

Sentence nr: 95
“It made her approachable,” Swan said.

Sentence nr: 96
He and his sister loved to talk basketball.

Sentence nr: 97
On their birthdays, they bought Knicks tickets and went together.

Sentence nr: 98
He remembers that LeBron James dropped 50 or more points on the Knicks at his birthday game one year and at Jordana’s the next.

Sentence nr: 99
When Swan started the tattoo blog, he consulted Jordana on what to name it.

Sentence nr: 100
“Just call it ‘NBA tattoos,’” she told him, “because that’s what people will search for.”
In 2012, Jordana was 31 and living in Brooklyn while on leave from a master’s program in sociology.

Sentence nr: 101
She had long struggled with mental health issues, and when Hurricane Sandy tore through New York she couldn’t cope.

Sentence nr: 102
A week after the storm, Ethan got a call telling him to come to the hospital; Jordana had overdosed.

Sentence nr: 103
She died on Nov. 3, 2012.

Sentence nr: 104
Within two months, Swan moved to California.

Sentence nr: 105
He couldn’t be in New York anymore.

Sentence nr: 106
“You don’t actually meet many siblings that are really that close,” Heather Anderson, Swan’s wife of five years, told me by phone from Los Angeles.

Sentence nr: 107
“I don’t know exactly what it was.

Sentence nr: 108
They had some kind of sibling magic.”
Anderson’s own sister died 10 years ago, of alcoholism.

Sentence nr: 109
“When you lose someone like that, there becomes a thing of wanting to live for them a little bit,” she said.

Sentence nr: 110
“You want to take on that person’s fire and interests and live right by that, because they can’t.

Sentence nr: 111
I haven’t talked to Ethan about it, but I have to believe he has some of that.”

 
LeBron James | Getty Images 

During the first year Swan collected NBA tattoo data, he got a Google alert about a story on Yahoo: “NBA Tats & Stats: Player Ink Reveals More Than You Think.” Writer Andrew Sweat, a contributor to Yahoo Voices, argued that tattooed players seek glory as point-scorers, while uninked players selflessly pull down rebounds and hand out assists.

Sentence nr: 112
Sweat backed up the claim with stats.

Sentence nr: 113
Of the top 10 players in points per game in the 2010-11 season, six had visible tattoos (Kevin Durant made it seven if you counted players with covered tattoos).

Sentence nr: 114
In the “team-oriented” categories of assists and rebounds, eight out of 10 leaders in each stat played in their original skin.

Sentence nr: 115
“Visible tats serve one purpose — to invite the world to look at ME, ME, ME!” Sweat wrote.

Sentence nr: 116
“Body ink draws attention to the individual, visually telling stories nobody asked to hear.”
Swan found the essay unsettling.

Sentence nr: 117
It didn’t simply criticize players’ taste in body art, the way so many others did.

Sentence nr: 118
It seemed to say that players with tattoos were worse people than those without them.

Sentence nr: 119
After he read the piece, he checked some of Sweat’s numbers.

Sentence nr: 120
“I got bummed,” Swan said, “because I couldn’t immediately disprove him.”
Yet there was plenty of room for skepticism.

Sentence nr: 121
To begin with, the Yahoo piece built skyscraper-size conclusions on a square-inch plot of evidence.

Sentence nr: 122
Six of the 10 leading scorers had tattoos; therefore, tattooed players were selfish.

Sentence nr: 123
Also, it wasn’t clear why rebounders and passers were “team-oriented” but point scorers weren’t.

Sentence nr: 124
Guys who score don’t help the team?

Sentence nr: 125
Then there was this: “The more visible tattoos a player sports, the more likely he is to excel in an individual-centered category like scoring.” So if a player has four visible tattoos, he is more likely to score a lot of points than a player with only two?

Sentence nr: 126
The piece offered no evidence.

Sentence nr: 127
Still, none of that meant the premise was wrong.

Sentence nr: 128
To really know would require deeper analysis.

Sentence nr: 129
I asked my colleague Carl Bialik to help.

Sentence nr: 130
He looked at stats of 636 NBA players in Swan’s four-year database — 288 without tattoos, 348 with at least one.

Sentence nr: 131
Using Basketball-Reference.com, Carl examined the career regular-season stats for each player, separating the players into groups of guards, forwards and centers.

Sentence nr: 132
For each of the subgroups with and without tattoos, he calculated their combined stats in 19 categories from offensive rebounds to personal fouls to three-point shooting.

Sentence nr: 133
The result: In none of the comparisons was there a major difference (20 percent either way) between tattooed players and those without ink.

Sentence nr: 134
And nothing pointed to one group being more “selfish” than the other: Forwards with tattoos had better per-48-minute rates for assists and steals, but also higher rates of turnovers and two-point field goals attempted and made.

Sentence nr: 135
Finally, Carl ran regressions on all 19 stats to see whether a player’s tattoos had any meaningful connection to that stat, after controlling for player position.

Sentence nr: 136
And for each of the stats, he found no statistically significant relationship.5 I emailed Andrew Sweat with the results and he didn’t argue with them, but stressed that he was merely writing about the statistical leaders in the 2010-11 season.

Sentence nr: 137
A few days after the Nets-Heat game, I met Swan for breakfast at a diner.

Sentence nr: 138
Over pancakes and coffee, I shared Carl’s analysis: If an NBA player has a tattoo, it means … at some point, he decided to get a tattoo.

Sentence nr: 139
Nothing more.

Sentence nr: 140
Swan smiled a little smile.

Sentence nr: 141
Now, this was a good day for his project.

Sentence nr: 142
A good day for Randy Foye and Trevor Ariza.

Sentence nr: 143
For DeShawn Stevenson and Chris Andersen and DeMarre Carroll.

Sentence nr: 144
For the tattoos that tell stories and the ones that don’t say much at all.

Sentence nr: 145
For The Answer and absent friends.

Sentence nr: 146
For Ethan Swan’s warm heart.

Sentence nr: 147
For Jordana.

Sentence nr: 148
For this gnarly world.

Sentence nr: 149
“Yes,” Swan whispered, and gave a little fist pump.

Sentence nr: 150
“Yes.”

