Sentence nr: 0
Rachel’s Season Is Fitting Neatly Into ‘Bachelorette’ History By Walt Hickey and Ella Koeze Filed under TV Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/bachelorette Published Jul.

Sentence nr: 1
17, 2017 FacebookTwitterEmail We’re in the home stretch of season 13 of “The Bachelorette,” which means it’s a perfect time to check in on how it’s held up against our rigorous pre-season “Bachelor” and “Bachelorette” analysis.

Sentence nr: 2
Did Rachel Lindsay — an attorney from Texas who has narrowed the field down to four gentlemen — handle her challenge like previous contestants?

Sentence nr: 3
Rachel’s season has seen seven men eliminated on dates, one unscheduled elimination with DeMario (who probably should have broken up with that nice girl before going on television) and 19 rose-ceremony eliminations.1 She seems to favor breaking it off with men on dates more so than her aggregate predecessors.

Sentence nr: 4
Her season reinforces the historical power of the first-impression rose, the rose given to the contestant who makes the strongest move on day one.

Sentence nr: 5
The recipient, Bryan, is among the final four going into hometown dates.

Sentence nr: 6
Love at first sight could be real, folks.

Sentence nr: 7
So have we learned anything?

Sentence nr: 8
Well, Peter, Dean and Bryan each had an early one-on-one date with Rachel.

Sentence nr: 9
Historically, those tend to mean a bit more.

Sentence nr: 10
But, if anything, this season is further proof that people who go on two-on-one dates are doomed.

Sentence nr: 11
No one who’s gone on one of those dates has won in years.

Sentence nr: 12
We wrote: More than half of two-on-one date survivors are gone within the next two weeks.

Sentence nr: 13
Within four weeks of a two-on-one date, 95 percent of participants are eliminated.

Sentence nr: 14
In the remaining three cases, the contestant won the competition.

Sentence nr: 15
But most two-on-ones spell doom, swiftly or soon enough.

Sentence nr: 16
And when Kenny and Lee went head to head, both were bounced swiftly — the serpentine Lee was eliminated on the date proper, and Rachel decided Kenny wasn’t her guy the following week.

Sentence nr: 17
But that’s all history now: We’re about to go to hometowns!

Sentence nr: 18
What can we say about what comes next?

Sentence nr: 19
We’ve looked before at how each season has proceeded, considering how much time each contender has had to spend with their Bachelor or Bachelorette by assigning a point value to dates, with a higher value based on how exclusive the dates are.

Sentence nr: 20
Generally speaking, one-on-one dates are better than small-group dates, which are better than large-group dates, which are better than no dates.

Sentence nr: 21
Going into the final four, here’s where all of the men stand, counting a one-on-one as one date, a two-on-one as half a date, a three-on-one as one-third of a date and so on.

Sentence nr: 22
Peter and Dean are neck and neck in terms of time they’ve spent with Rachel, with Bryan coming up just behind.

Sentence nr: 23
Eric’s late break (getting a one-on-one in week six) was enough to move him forward, though he is far behind the top three.

Sentence nr: 24
And poor Adam and Matt, who everyone met more or less for the first time as they were getting gently rejected by Rachel last week, never really had a chance.

Sentence nr: 25
<line>The most shocking thing about the numbers on this chart is the harsh reality that Rachel has been on no more than 2.5 dates with any of the men whose families she’s about to meet.

Sentence nr: 26
At this point, best-case scenario, she will have gone on a total of 5.5 dates with the man she gets engaged to in the finale.</line> Love!

Sentence nr: 27
It’s a crazy thing.

