Sentence nr: 0
Apr.

Sentence nr: 1
14, 2014 at 10:21 AM A Statistical Analysis of the Work of Bob Ross By Walt Hickey Filed under Happy Spreadsheets Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/bob-ross FacebookTwitterEmail Bob Ross in 1985.

Sentence nr: 2
"The Joy of Painting," the Bob Ross name and images are trademarks of Bob Ross Inc. All rights reserved.

Sentence nr: 3
Used with permission.

Sentence nr: 4
Bob Ross in 1985.

Sentence nr: 5
The Joy of Painting, the Bob Ross name and images are trademarks of Bob Ross Inc. All rights reserved.

Sentence nr: 6
Used with permission.

Sentence nr: 7
Bob Ross was a consummate teacher.

Sentence nr: 8
He guided fans along as he painted “happy trees,” “almighty mountains” and “fluffy clouds” over the course of his 11-year television career on his PBS show, “The Joy of Painting.” In total, Ross painted 381 works on the show, relying on a distinct set of elements, scenes and themes, and thereby providing thousands of data points.

Sentence nr: 9
I decided to use that data to teach something myself: the important statistical concepts of conditional probability and clustering, as well as a lesson on the limitations of data.

Sentence nr: 10
So let’s perm out our hair and get ready to create some happy spreadsheets!

Sentence nr: 11
What I found — through data analysis and an interview with one of Ross’s closest collaborators — was a body of work that was defined by consistency and a fundamentally personal ideal.

Sentence nr: 12
Ross was born in Daytona, Fla., and joined the Air Force at 17.

Sentence nr: 13
He was stationed in Fairbanks and spent the next 20 years in Alaska.

Sentence nr: 14
His time there seems to have had a significant impact on his preferred subjects of trees, mountains, clouds, lakes and snow.

Sentence nr: 15
Paintings by Bob Ross featured on PBS’s “The Joy of Painting.” The Bob Ross name and images are trademarks of Bob Ross Inc. All rights reserved.

Sentence nr: 16
Used with permission.

Sentence nr: 17
<line>Of the 403 episodes of “The Joy of Painting” — whose first run was from 1983 to 1994 and which continues to air in reruns on PBS stations nationwide — Ross painted in 381, and the rest featured a guest, most frequently his son Steve Ross.</line> Based on images of Bob Ross’s paintings available in the Bob Ross Inc. store, I coded all the episodes using 67 keywords describing content (trees, water, mountains, weather elements and man-made structures), stylistic choices in framing the paintings, and guest artists, for a grand total of 3,224 tags.

Sentence nr: 18
I analyzed the data to find out exactly what Ross, who died in 1995, painted for more than a decade on TV.

Sentence nr: 19
The top-line results are to be expected — wouldn’t you know, he did paint a bunch of mountains, trees and lakes!

Sentence nr: 20
— but then I put some numbers to Ross’s classic figures of speech.

Sentence nr: 21
He didn’t paint oaks or spruces, he painted “happy trees.” He favored “almighty mountains” to peaks.

Sentence nr: 22
Once he’d painted one tree, he didn’t paint another — he painted a “friend.” Here’s how often each tag that appeared more than five times showed up over the 381 episodes: Now that we know the basic probabilities of individual tags, we can also find the joint probabilities of some of these events.

Sentence nr: 23
For instance, how often do a deciduous tree and a coniferous tree appear in the same painting?

Sentence nr: 24
<bar>We know that 57 percent of paintings contain a deciduous tree and 53 percent of paintings contain a coniferous tree.

Sentence nr: 25
According to our data set, 20 percent of paintings contain at least one of each.</bar> What’s more, we can also find the probability that Ross painted something given that he painted something else, a statistic that’s called conditional probability.

Sentence nr: 26
Conditional probability can be a bit tricky.

Sentence nr: 27
<bar>We know that 44 percent of Ross’s paintings contain clouds, 9 percent contain the beach and 7 percent contain both the clouds and the beach.</bar> We can use this information to figure out two things: the probability that Ross painted a cloud given that he painted a beach, and the probability that he painted a beach given that he painted a cloud.

Sentence nr: 28
You divide the joint probability — 7 percent in this case — by the probability of the given — 44 percent or 9 percent, depending on whether you want to know the probability of a beach given a cloud or a cloud given a beach.

Sentence nr: 29
The biggest pitfall people often face is assuming the two probabilities are the same.

Sentence nr: 30
The probability that Ross painted a cloud given that he painted the beach — essentially, how many beach paintings have clouds — is (0.07)/(0.09), which is 78 percent.

Sentence nr: 31
The vast majority of beach scenes contain clouds.

Sentence nr: 32
However, the probability that Ross painted a beach given that he painted a cloud — or, how many cloud paintings contain a beach — is (0.07)/(0.44), or 16 percent.

Sentence nr: 33
So the vast majority of cloud paintings don’t have beaches.

Sentence nr: 34
I figured out the conditional probability of every Bob Ross tag against every other tag to answer the following pressing questions.

Sentence nr: 35
<bar>What is the probability, given that Ross painted a happy tree, that he then painted a friend for that tree?

Sentence nr: 36
There’s a 93 percent chance that Ross paints a second tree given that he has painted a first.

Sentence nr: 37
What percentage of Bob Ross paintings contain an almighty mountain?

Sentence nr: 38
About 39 percent prominently feature a mountain.

Sentence nr: 39
What percentage of those paintings contain several almighty mountains?

Sentence nr: 40
Ross was also amenable to painting friends for mountains.

Sentence nr: 41
Sixty percent of paintings with one mountain in them have at least two mountains.

Sentence nr: 42
In what percentage of those paintings is a mountain covered with snow?

Sentence nr: 43
Given that Ross painted a mountain, there is a 66 percent chance there is snow on it.

Sentence nr: 44
What about footy little hills?

Sentence nr: 45
Hills appear in 4 percent of Ross’s paintings.

Sentence nr: 46
He clearly preferred almighty mountains.

Sentence nr: 47
How about happy little clouds?

Sentence nr: 48
Excellent question, as 44 percent of Ross’s paintings prominently feature at least one cloud.

Sentence nr: 49
Given that there is a painted cloud, there’s a 47 percent chance it is a distinctly cumulus one.

Sentence nr: 50
There’s only a 14 percent chance that a painted cloud is a distinctly cirrus one.

Sentence nr: 51
What about charming little cabins?

Sentence nr: 52
About 18 percent of his paintings feature a cabin.

Sentence nr: 53
Given that Ross painted a cabin, there’s a 35 percent chance that it’s on a lake, and a 40 percent chance there’s snow on the ground.

Sentence nr: 54
While 72 percent of cabins are in the same painting as conifers, only 63 percent are near deciduous trees.

Sentence nr: 55
How often did he paint water?

Sentence nr: 56
All the time!

Sentence nr: 57
About 34 percent of Ross’s paintings contain a lake, 33 percent contain a river or stream, and 9 percent contain the ocean.</bar> Sounds like he didn’t like the beach.

Sentence nr: 58
Much to the contrary.

Sentence nr: 59
<bar>You can see the beach in 75 percent of Ross’s seaside paintings, but the sun in only 31 percent of them.

Sentence nr: 60
If there’s an ocean, it’s probably choppy: 97 percent of ocean paintings have waves.

Sentence nr: 61
Ross’s 36 ocean paintings were also more likely to feature cliffs, clouds and rocks than the average painting.</bar> What about Steve Ross?

Sentence nr: 62
<bar>Steve seemed to prefer lakes far more than Bob.

Sentence nr: 63
While only 34 percent of Bob’s paintings have a lake in them, 91 percent of Steve’s paintings do.</bar> One useful lens we can apply to this sort of data — where we’re comparing vectors of information — is a clustering tool.

Sentence nr: 64
The idea behind clustering is to determine how close certain groups of data are to other points in the data set.

Sentence nr: 65
Researchers use clustering analysis in all sorts of areas — from biology to consumer marketing — as a way of segmenting a population of, say, plants or people.

Sentence nr: 66
It allows us to find interesting subsets of data based on how similar or different certain subgroups are from the rest of the set.

Sentence nr: 67
<bar>I used an algorithm to divide the entire set of 403 paintings from “The Joy of Painting” into clusters of similar paintings.

Sentence nr: 68
I wanted to know whether it was possible to identify the 10 basic paintings featured on the PBS series.

Sentence nr: 69
To do this, I ran a k-means clustering analysis of the paintings.

Sentence nr: 70
The results were mixed.

Sentence nr: 71
First, let’s look at the clusters that make intuitive sense.

Sentence nr: 72
The clear winners are: A cluster of 50 paintings tagged “snow” and “winter” A cluster of 28 paintings each with an oval white-space frame A cluster of 35 paintings of ocean scenes.

Sentence nr: 73
These were the kinds of clear clusterings we were hoping to find.

Sentence nr: 74
Each has a common theme and falls under the banner of iconic Bob Ross images.

Sentence nr: 75
He painted about one beach scene and one oval-framed image per season, and about two scenes with snow in the foreground per season.

Sentence nr: 76
It makes sense.

Sentence nr: 77
Here are some clusters that also make sense, but don’t tell us a whole lot about Ross’s favorite kind of painting: A cluster of 13 paintings by guest host Steve Ross A cluster of 7 paintings containing a bridge A cluster of 11 paintings containing flowers A cluster of 30 paintings containing a fence or a barn A cluster of 33 paintings containing a waterfall.

Sentence nr: 78
These clusters identify some tags that appear in only a few paintings, but the groupings are not supremely helpful in defining what Ross painted.

Sentence nr: 79
For example, flowers were very rarely the main focus of a painting, and we already knew how many times Steve Ross appeared on the program.

Sentence nr: 80
The final two clusters were the most broad: A cluster of 95 paintings that had trees and at least one mountain A cluster of 103 paintings that had trees but no mountains.

Sentence nr: 81
</bar> Not supremely helpful, but still quite interesting.

Sentence nr: 82
Clustering analysis is an appealing tool for this kind of data but hardly has all the answers.

Sentence nr: 83
To learn more about Ross and his work beyond what I already knew from the data, I called Annette Kowalski, who founded Bob Ross Inc. with the painter and remains the steward of his work.

Sentence nr: 84
She confirmed something I had discovered in my review of hundreds of Ross’s landscapes: His work isn’t defined by what is included in his paintings, but by what’s excluded.

Sentence nr: 85
“I can think of two times he painted people,” Kowalski said.

Sentence nr: 86
“There was a man by a campfire, and two people walking through the woods.” Indeed, our data shows that Ross only painted a person — in silhouette against a tree near a campfire — one time.

Sentence nr: 87
One of the few Bob Ross paintings in PBS’s “The Joy of Painting” that featured a person.

Sentence nr: 88
The Bob Ross name and images are trademarks of Bob Ross Inc. All rights reserved.

Sentence nr: 89
Used with permission.

Sentence nr: 90
<bar>When we analyze the structures he painted, it appears Ross preferred the simple to the elaborate.

Sentence nr: 91
He painted 69 cabins, 25 fences in various states of disrepair and 17 barns.

Sentence nr: 92
More complex man-made structures are remarkably rare in his work.

Sentence nr: 93
Bridges appear only seven times.

Sentence nr: 94
Boats and mills, twice each.

Sentence nr: 95
Ross painted one dock, one lighthouse and one windmill over his 381 episodes.</bar> There’s something about the structures Ross painted that has gone almost entirely unnoticed by fans, according to Kowalski.

Sentence nr: 96
“I will tell you Bob’s biggest secret.

Sentence nr: 97
If you notice, his cabins never had chimneys on them,” she said.

Sentence nr: 98
“That’s because chimneys represented people, and he didn’t want any sign of a person in his paintings.

Sentence nr: 99
Check the cabins.

Sentence nr: 100
They have no chimneys.” She immediately added, “I’m sure you’re going to call me tomorrow and say you found a chimney.” And I did!

Sentence nr: 101
But it took a lot of hunting.

Sentence nr: 102
In season 7 episode 1, “Winter Cabin,” there’s a chimney on the cabin (featured above in the third row, center column).

Sentence nr: 103
But the fact that a chimney appeared once in 381 paintings doesn’t really diminish Kowalski’s point.

Sentence nr: 104
When it comes down to it, “The Joy of Painting” was never really about painting.

Sentence nr: 105
Even Kowalski, who runs a company that sells Bob Ross-branded painting supplies, believes most viewers aren’t in it for the art.

Sentence nr: 106
“The majority of people who watch Bob Ross have no interest in painting,” she said.

Sentence nr: 107
“Mostly it’s his calming voice.”

