Sentence nr: 0
Rachel Lindsay’s ‘Bachelorette’ Season, In Three Charts She wasn’t messing around.

Sentence nr: 1
By Ella Koeze and Gus Wezerek Filed under TV Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/bachelorette Published Aug. 7, 2017 FacebookTwitterEmail Oof, what a finale.

Sentence nr: 2
The three-hour, live conclusion to Season 13 of “The Bachelorette” and Rachel Lindsay’s quest for love didn’t come down to a typical choice between two men — she sent suitors Eric and Peter home early before accepting last-man-standing Bryan Abasolo’s proposal amongst the windswept vineyards of La Rioja, Spain.

Sentence nr: 3
It seems like 11 years ago that 31 hopeful men and one doll stepped out of that limo looking for love, and yet only 11 weeks have passed.

Sentence nr: 4
How did we end up with Eric, Peter and, in the end, Bryan?

Sentence nr: 5
What happened to all those other men?

Sentence nr: 6
Looking back at the men eliminated this season, we get a fresh appreciation for everything Rachel had to endure.

Sentence nr: 7
Remember how Whaboom and the Ticklemonster weren’t eliminated IMMEDIATELY?

Sentence nr: 8
Remember Jack Stone’s dream to just “lock the door” and “lay in bed” with Rachel?

Sentence nr: 9
*Shudders* Despite all this, Rachel persevered.

Sentence nr: 10
Rachel focused on the men who made strong first impressions and didn’t waste much time on the others.

Sentence nr: 11
Of the 18 date roses that Rachel gave out during the season, only five went to suitors who didn’t end up in the final four.

Sentence nr: 12
She was similarly selective in picking who she would go on dates with.

Sentence nr: 13
In Week 7, for example, Rachel could have given one of the three available one-on-one dates to Matt or Adam, who had only been on group dates.

Sentence nr: 14
Instead, she spent them with Dean, Bryan and Peter, who had already gone on one-on-ones.

Sentence nr: 15
As the chart shows, Rachel concentrated her attention on a limited number of suitors — not the worst strategy if you’re trying to find a husband, but it made for predictable TV.

Sentence nr: 16
Almost everyone in the FiveThirtyEight “Bachelorette” bracket pool had Dean, Bryan and Peter in their final four.

Sentence nr: 17
Throughout all the drama, Rachel and her men were also roaming the globe — no metaphorical journey to find love would be worth watching without actual travel.

Sentence nr: 18
This season’s international destinations were all in Western Europe and pretty boring (though there was some Viking fighting).

Sentence nr: 19
But Rachel did get to see a substantial slice of the good ol’ USA by choosing a geographically diverse final four for hometown dates.

Sentence nr: 20
It’s been a wild ride for Rachel and Bachelor Nation, but we’re ready to move on to a new love story.

Sentence nr: 21
So … who’s going to be the next Bachelor?1 UPDATE (Aug. 7, 11:03 p.m.): This article was updated after the season finale.

Sentence nr: 22
Additional reporting contributions by Walt Hickey.

