Sentence nr: 0
Apr.

Sentence nr: 1
16, 2014 at 6:27 PM Early Senate Polls Have Plenty to Tell Us About November By Harry Enten Filed under 2014 Midterms Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/early-senate-polls FacebookTwitterEmail Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., waits to speak during a campaign stop at Badgett Supply in Madisonville, Ky. Stephen Lance Dennee / AP Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., waits to speak during a campaign stop at Badgett Supply in Madisonville, Ky. Stephen Lance Dennee / AP Republican Kentucky Senator Mitch McConnell is fighting for his political life — or is he?

Sentence nr: 2
The Senate minority leader is nearly tied in the polls with Democratic opponent Alison Lundergan Grimes.

Sentence nr: 3
But President Obama’s approval in Kentucky is in the low 30s, suggesting the Democratic brand is so unpopular that McConnell could be fine by the time votes are cast.

Sentence nr: 4
These competing indicators have led to myriad predictions from political analysts.

Sentence nr: 5
The Cook Political Report rates the race as tossup, the Rothenberg Political Report puts it in the leaning Republican column, and Sabato’s Crystal Ball goes one step further at likely Republican.

Sentence nr: 6
My colleague Nate Silver’s forecast, meanwhile, says McConnell has a 75 percent chance to win.

Sentence nr: 7
Kentucky isn’t the only state with a disparity between what the polls are telling us and the state’s opinion of Democrats.

Sentence nr: 8
Dems’ other possible Senate pickup opportunity, according to the polls, is in Georgia, a state that didn’t treat Obama kindly in 2012.

Sentence nr: 9
The polls are also close in Alaska, Arkansas, Louisiana and North Carolina, despite Mitt Romney’s success there in the last presidential election.

Sentence nr: 10
More than six months from the midterm elections, current polling and past precedent are competing for our trust.

Sentence nr: 11
I analyzed which measure is more indicative come November, and it turns out that polls are a more robust metric even though their numbers are still sparse and there’s still so much time remaining before the election.

Sentence nr: 12
That’s not to say that a president’s approval rating is useless: It can help refine early polls to make them more accurate.

Sentence nr: 13
This year, when we factor in both, it doesn’t look promising for Democrats in Alaska, Arkansas, Kentucky or Louisiana.

Sentence nr: 14
For my analysis, I took a RealClearPolitics-style average of all the polls1 for 107 races since 2006.

Sentence nr: 15
Separately, for comparison, I collected the president’s approval rating in the matching states in the first half of the year.

Sentence nr: 16
Once that was all in place, I produced this chart, which shows that early4 polls do a pretty good job of forecasting the final vote margin.

Sentence nr: 17
<bar>The average error between the early polls and the final results was 6.4 points.

Sentence nr: 18
For comparison, in the 2012 Senate race, polls taken in the final month before the election still had an average error of 4.8 points.</bar> <bar>Overall, the president’s party’s candidate won 83 percent of the time he or she led in the early poll average and lost 88 percent of the time when he or she trailed.</bar> A president’s approval rating isn’t as strongly tied to the ultimate result.

Sentence nr: 19
There is a link — just a weaker one.

Sentence nr: 20
Note how much more scattered the data points are in the chart below compared to in the chart above.

Sentence nr: 21
<bar>Of the 58 races in my sample where the president’s statewide approval rating was less than 43 percent (as it is for Obama now, nationally), the president’s party’s candidate lost 72 percent.

Sentence nr: 22
On the other hand, when a president’s approval rating was greater than 43 percent, the president’s party’s candidate lost 35 percent of races.

Sentence nr: 23
In other words, a president’s approval rating is far from a perfect predictor of how Senate races will turn out.</bar> But even though polls are better predictors than presidential approval, the latter still has plenty of information to offer.

Sentence nr: 24
When I combined early horse-race polls and presidential approval, the median error in early-cycle predictions dropped to 4.0 points.

Sentence nr: 25
That’s nearly two points lower than using the polls alone, and the average error dropped about a point to 5.6 points.

Sentence nr: 26
<bar>The fact that presidential approval ratings do matter in addition to early horse-race polling should worry some Democrats in 2014.

Sentence nr: 27
Right now, I estimate Obama’s approval rating is somewhere between 30 percent and 33 percent in Alaska, Arkansas and Kentucky.

Sentence nr: 28
In Louisiana, I estimate it to be in the high 30s.</bar> To give you an idea of how the data suggests Obama is going to hurt these candidates, I pulled probabilistic 2014 projections from a model that looks at both the polls11 and Obama’s approval rating and one that looks at only the polls.

Sentence nr: 29
The table below shows the Democratic candidate’s chance of winning.

Sentence nr: 30
(The states included have had at least one poll taken in 2014.)

Sentence nr: 31
Using polls and approval ratings, the current close races in Alaska, Arkansas and Kentucky are estimated to favor Republicans.

Sentence nr: 32
(For instance the model gives McConnell a 73 percent chance to win, which is quite close to Nate’s estimate.)

Sentence nr: 33
In Louisiana, Obama’s rating hurts Democratic Senate candidate Mary Landrieu, but the current polling average this year already had her projected to lose.

Sentence nr: 34
In Georgia and North Carolina, Obama’s approval rating is high enough that it doesn’t hurt the Democrats too much.

Sentence nr: 35
Democrats Gary Peters in Michigan and Al Franken in Minnesota are likely helped a bit by President Obama.

Sentence nr: 36
Overall, this simple model puts Democratic losses in the Senate at 6.8 seats, just off the FiveThirtyEight Senate forecast of 5.8 seats, which takes into account other factors including fundraising totals and candidate ideology.

Sentence nr: 37
Still, it’s important to emphasize that we’re talking about early numbers.

Sentence nr: 38
Twenty of the 107 races from 2006 to 2012 in our model have errors of 10 points or greater, even when controlling for both approval and early polls.

Sentence nr: 39
<bar>Ohio Republican Rob Portman beat Democrat Lee Fisher by nearly 17.4 points in 2010, even though early polls were close and Obama’s approval wasn’t bad early in the year.

Sentence nr: 40
The same goes for Republican Roy Blunt in Missouri in 2010.</bar> So Mitch McConnell’s close race in Kentucky this year is not just about polls, it’s about Obama’s approval rating, too.

Sentence nr: 41
Conversely, even if Obama’s approval rating is holding Democrats back in the midterms, remember that statewide polls are usually the more predictive metric.

Sentence nr: 42
Smart political forecasts incorporate both.

