Sentence nr: 0
May 19, 2017 at 8:00 AM The Battle For Riddler Nation, Round 2 Edited by Oliver Roeder Filed under The Riddler FacebookTwitterEmail Illustration by Guillaume Kurkdjian Welcome to The Riddler.

Sentence nr: 1
Every week, I offer up problems related to the things we hold dear around here: math, logic and probability.

Sentence nr: 2
There are two types: Riddler Express for those of you who want something bite-sized and Riddler Classic for those of you in the slow-puzzle movement.

Sentence nr: 3
Submit a correct answer for either,1 and you may get a shoutout in the next column.

Sentence nr: 4
That’ll be in two weeks — the Riddler and I are headed on vacation.

Sentence nr: 5
If you need a hint, or if you have a favorite puzzle collecting dust in your attic, find me on Twitter.

Sentence nr: 6
Riddler Express From Jerry Meyers, a careening commute problem: Four co-workers carpool to work each day.

Sentence nr: 7
A driver is selected randomly for the drive to work and again randomly for the drive home.

Sentence nr: 8
Each of the drivers has a lead foot, and each has a chance of being ticketed for speeding.

Sentence nr: 9
Driver A has a 10 percent chance of getting a ticket each time he drives, Driver B a 15 percent chance, Driver C a 20 percent chance, and Driver D a 25 percent chance.

Sentence nr: 10
The state will immediately revoke the license of a driver after his or her third ticket, and a driver will stop driving in the carpool once his license is revoked.

Sentence nr: 11
Since there is only one police officer on the carpool route, a maximum of one ticket will be issued per morning and a max of one per evening.

Sentence nr: 12
Assuming that all four drivers start with no tickets, how many days can we expect the carpool to last until all the drivers have lost their licenses?

Sentence nr: 13
Submit your answer Riddler Classic Back by popular demand, it’s the Battle for Riddler Nation!

Sentence nr: 14
The benevolent reign of Cyrus Hettle, who won the inaugural battle back in February, is over, and it’s time for a new king or queen to be crowned.

Sentence nr: 15
Here are the rules: In a distant, war-torn land, there are 10 castles.

Sentence nr: 16
There are two warlords: you and your archenemy, with whom you’re competing to collect the most victory points.

Sentence nr: 17
Each castle has its own strategic value for a would-be conqueror.

Sentence nr: 18
Specifically, the castles are worth 1, 2, 3, …, 9, and 10 victory points.

Sentence nr: 19
You and your enemy each have 100 soldiers to distribute, any way you like, to fight at any of the 10 castles.

Sentence nr: 20
Whoever sends more soldiers to a given castle conquers that castle and wins its victory points.

Sentence nr: 21
If you each send the same number of troops, you split the points.

Sentence nr: 22
You don’t know what distribution of forces your enemy has chosen until the battles begin.

Sentence nr: 23
Whoever wins the most points wins the war.

Sentence nr: 24
Submit a plan distributing your 100 soldiers among the 10 castles.

Sentence nr: 25
But this time, you’ve got some valuable game theoretic intel.

Sentence nr: 26
We posted all the earlier battle plans on GitHub, and the chart below shows the distributions of soldiers from the first battle.

Sentence nr: 27
Once I receive all your battle plans, I’ll adjudicate all the possible one-on-one matchups.

Sentence nr: 28
Whoever wins the most wars wins the battle royal and is crowned king or queen of Riddler Nation!

Sentence nr: 29
Analyze.

Sentence nr: 30
Adapt.

Sentence nr: 31
Conquer.

Sentence nr: 32
Rule!

Sentence nr: 33
Submit your plan Solution to last week’s Riddler Express Congratulations to 👏 Tahna Hekhuis 👏 of Santa Barbara, California, winner of last week’s Express puzzle!

Sentence nr: 34
You are handed a particular strange shape.

Sentence nr: 35
Can you cut it into three pieces and reassemble them to form a square?

Sentence nr: 36
The puzzle’s submitter, Diarmuid Early, provided the following solution, which first appeared in a book of math puzzles he co-authored.

Sentence nr: 37
It’s hard to have a systematic approach to this problem.

Sentence nr: 38
All we can really do is experiment.

Sentence nr: 39
Because there were 81 individual squares, it’s easy to see that that the square to be formed must of be side length nine.

Sentence nr: 40
(\(9^2 = 81\).)

Sentence nr: 41
If we remove a strip of nine squares from the bottom of the figure, we can then deconstruct the rest of the shape into an eight-by-nine rectangle, and add our strip to the side like so: Solution to last week’s Riddler Classic Congratulations to 👏 Haydon Bambury 👏 of London, winner of last week’s Classic puzzle!

Sentence nr: 42
This week, it’s a video solution!

Sentence nr: 43
Want to submit a riddle?

Sentence nr: 44
Email me at oliver.roeder@fivethirtyeight.com.

