Sentence nr: 0
Jun.

Sentence nr: 1
25, 2014 at 10:40 AM The FiveThirtyEight International Food Association’s 2014 World Cup By Nate Silver and Walt Hickey Filed under FiveThirtyAte Get the data on GitHub GitHub data at data/food-world-cup FacebookTwitterEmail Illustration by Ben Buysse Illustration by Ben Buysse Walter: Here at FiveThirtyEight, two things are dominating our interest this summer.

Sentence nr: 2
The first is the 2014 FIFA World Cup, an international tournament of countries trying to prove who’s the best at soccer.

Sentence nr: 3
The second is the burrito, a flour tortilla wrapped around a protein and other ingredients.

Sentence nr: 4
Inevitably, we combined our two favorite pursuits.

Sentence nr: 5
After my request to fly around the globe to sample a dish from each World Cup nation was met with awkward silence, we decided to democratize this process.

Sentence nr: 6
If you want to see a talented food writer conduct a World Cup of Food, check out the ambitious project by Al Jazeera’s Rosie Schaap, who uses “specialized knowledge” and “developed taste” to ascertain the best food in the tourney.

Sentence nr: 7
I have neither, so democracy it is.

Sentence nr: 8
We polled 1,373 Americans through SurveyMonkey Audience and asked them to rate the national cuisines of the 32 teams that qualified for the World Cup, as well as eight additional nations with bad soccer but great food: China, Cuba, Ethiopia, India, Ireland, Thailand, Turkey and Vietnam.

Sentence nr: 9
Nate: Nate here.

Sentence nr: 10
I’ll be interrupting Walter to provide further detail on our methodology and commentary about the cuisines.

Sentence nr: 11
We were intrigued by the apparent correlation between countries that are good at soccer and those that are good at food.

Sentence nr: 12
Consider the past four World Cup champions: Spain, Italy, France and Brazil.

Sentence nr: 13
Great food!

Sentence nr: 14
By contrast, the past four countries to win an Olympic gold medal in ice hockey: Canada, Sweden, the Czech Republic and Russia.1 Unless you have a hankering for poutine or borscht, not so appealing.

Sentence nr: 15
The eight countries that Walter mentioned are what we call our “potluck” entrants.

Sentence nr: 16
If you’re a fringe contender like Belgium, you really do not want to draw China or India into your group.

Sentence nr: 17
We also included Ireland in the potluck draw — a much more favorable opponent.

Sentence nr: 18
Walter: Respondents were asked to rate each country’s cuisine on a scale from 1 to 5.

Sentence nr: 19
A five means that the respondents “love this country’s traditional cuisine” and “think it’s one of the best in the world” and a one means the opposite.

Sentence nr: 20
Since these are Americans we’re talking about here, we let them opt out of the question if they were unfamiliar with a particular cuisine.

Sentence nr: 21
After randomly sorting each of our play-ins into Groups A through H, we simulated their performance in the group stage by looking at respondents familiar with both nations’ cuisines.

Sentence nr: 22
Nate: That last point is worth repeating.

Sentence nr: 23
The results we’ll show you are solely among people who had an opinion about both cuisines in a particular matchup.

Sentence nr: 24
We call this the “turnout rate,” and it varied anywhere from 7 percent to 65 percent depending on the matchup.

Sentence nr: 25
And there’s another twist to ensure that this isn’t purely a popularity contest.

Sentence nr: 26
Just as political polls are weighted toward likely voters, ours is weighted toward people who are most interested in actually consuming these foods — likely eaters.

Sentence nr: 27
We asked our respondents two questions, one related to their level of interest in cuisine from around the world and another related to their knowledge about it.

Sentence nr: 28
Their votes could be weighted by a multiple anywhere from zero to six depending on their responses.

Sentence nr: 29
If you find this horribly undemocratic or want to remix the numbers in a different way, we’ve posted all our data on Github.

Sentence nr: 30
Walter: We then played out the 10 head-to-head matches from each group, much as they do in the soccer World Cup, except nobody took a dive.

Sentence nr: 31
Also as in soccer, a draw was possible if the plurality of respondents rated both cuisines equally.

Sentence nr: 32
<bar>As an example, let’s say 100 people had an opinion about the traditional cuisine of two countries, A and B.

Sentence nr: 33
If 20 preferred A over B, 45 preferred B over A, and 35 rated them equally, B would win that “match.” If 20 preferred A over B, 25 preferred B over A, and 55 rated them equally, the match would be a draw.</bar> Nate: The rules are otherwise the same as in the soccer World Cup.

Sentence nr: 34
In the group stage, a win counts for three points and a draw counts for one.

Sentence nr: 35
The two countries with the most points from each group will advance to the knockout stage (American translation: the playoffs).

Sentence nr: 36
Just as ties in World Cup groups are broken on the basis of goal differential, ours are broken on vote differential.

Sentence nr: 37
Let’s look at our groups and their performances.

Sentence nr: 38
Nate: Perhaps not everyone shares our love of Mexican food.

Sentence nr: 39
But this is Mexico’s group to lose.

Sentence nr: 40
And they got a rather fortunate potluck draw in Ireland.

Sentence nr: 41
Walter: My people, the Irish, are known for a great many things — a long history of invention, for example — but great food is not among them.

Sentence nr: 42
When your best-known culinary achievement involves cabbage, you’re doomed.

Sentence nr: 43
Nate: The food down in Brazil was tasty, if a little protein-heavy.

Sentence nr: 44
Maybe you wouldn’t come for the food but you’d certainly stay for it.

Sentence nr: 45
And I can’t see any other country getting second place.

Sentence nr: 46
Nate: A predictable set of results.

Sentence nr: 47
But Mexico’s margins are quite something: an average of 61 percent of the vote for and just 10 percent against.

Sentence nr: 48
Walter: A fond farewell to Cameroon, which had the cuisine Americans were most unfamiliar with.

Sentence nr: 49
Only 9 percent of respondents knew enough about it to form an opinion.

Sentence nr: 50
A little research shows that one specialty is kebabs, so now I’m going to try to find a Cameroonian joint so I can become a food-hipster.

Sentence nr: 51
Walter: Here’s our first group with some solid competition.

Sentence nr: 52
Ethiopia, the potluck entrant, should take at least second place in this group if there’s any sense of fairness, but I wouldn’t be shocked if Americans aren’t super familiar with the deliciousness that is wat.

Sentence nr: 53
Since roughly 80 percent of my diet is cheese and I’m on an Edam kick, I’d also like to see the Dutch score a win here.

Sentence nr: 54
Nate: But this might also be the sort of group where Americans are going more on vague impressions than first-hand experience.

Sentence nr: 55
Spain, if its cuisine has yet to reach the mass-market appeal of Mexico or Italy, would seem like the favorite.

Sentence nr: 56
Chilean food is obscure enough that Yelp doesn’t include a distinct category for it.

Sentence nr: 57
I had some excellent food in Australia.

Sentence nr: 58
But it was lamb and seafood and some great Asian food, not what Americans might think of as “traditional” Australian food, like Vegemite and kangaroo.

Sentence nr: 59
As for the Netherlands, here are my food-hipster impressions after a few trips to Amsterdam: The non-Dutch cuisine, especially the Southeast Asian food, is very good.

Sentence nr: 60
But overall the Netherlands does not seem as food-obsessed as most nations in Western Europe.

Sentence nr: 61
I’m not sure the Dutch would vote themselves into the knockout stage.

Sentence nr: 62
Nate: I’m impressed that our likely eaters gave Ethiopia the second position, which will ensure at least some African representation in the knockout stage.

Sentence nr: 63
But it was a very close result.

Sentence nr: 64
Chile had the better vote differential.

Sentence nr: 65
Walter: The Dutch got robbed.

Sentence nr: 66
There, I said it.

Sentence nr: 67
Nate: Dude, the Chileans got robbed — maybe.

Sentence nr: 68
The Dutch drew with Vegemite.

Sentence nr: 69
Walter: This is the closest thing we have to a Group of Death, since everything sounds delicious here.

Sentence nr: 70
In a previous life I was a line cook in a Greek diner, so I personally hope Greece takes it all the way to the final, and I’d say it’s guaranteed to get the top slot.

Sentence nr: 71
Choosing between Japanese and Indian food, my heart wants India to win because of naan alone, but my head says Japan will win because of sushi.

Sentence nr: 72
Nate: I’m a JIM guy: Japanese, Italian, Mexican.

Sentence nr: 73
If I had to choose between eating JIM for the rest of my life or ABCDEFGHKLNOPQRSTUVWXYZ (every other cuisine in the world combined), I’d go with JIM.

Sentence nr: 74
Will our likely eaters agree?

Sentence nr: 75
Japanese food probably travels less well than Mexican or Italian food: It’s more dependent on super-fresh ingredients and its flavors are less familiar to an American palate.

Sentence nr: 76
But people do like their spicy tuna rolls.

Sentence nr: 77
With that said, this is a deep group, and India makes it a hell of a lot tougher.

Sentence nr: 78
I’m curious about the perception of Greek food and slightly less confident that it’s sure to advance.

Sentence nr: 79
Do Americans think of D-grade gyro meat, or amazing seafood by the Mediterranean?

Sentence nr: 80
Nate: Well, that didn’t resolve much.

Sentence nr: 81
Japan, Greece and India drew all their matches against one another.

Sentence nr: 82
But Japan has the best vote differential and takes the top position.

Sentence nr: 83
Greece goes through in second.

Sentence nr: 84
Walter: It’s sad to see Indian food go out like this — on vote differential — since it had the potential to be such a strong competitor in later rounds.

Sentence nr: 85
I wish Ivorian food were more popular in the States, because grilled Ivorian land snails look wild.

Sentence nr: 86
Nate: Escargot or no, we shouldn’t bury the lede: India is out despite going undefeated in the group stage.

Sentence nr: 87
This is almost as unfair as the actual World Cup.

Sentence nr: 88
Nate: Italy is the perfect fit for this competition.

Sentence nr: 89
It can go highbrow — after France and Japan, Italy has the most Michelin-starred restaurants.

Sentence nr: 90
But it does just as well at simple and unpretentious cuisine.

Sentence nr: 91
It’s also versatile: The Italians do amazing things with pasta, with fish, with cured meat — and don’t overlook their facility with a good cut of steak.

Sentence nr: 92
And really, who’s going to beat them in the group?

Sentence nr: 93
Walter: Italy is going to crush it in this tournament, but for all the wrong reasons.

Sentence nr: 94
I’d bet Americans are breaking for them on pizza and the Olive Garden — stuffed crust is an American innovation, and I doubt Papa John’s delivers to St. Peter’s Square — when the Italians deserve to win it on cured meats alone.

Sentence nr: 95
Nate: I need to take you to a few of my favorite Italian restaurants or book you on a flight to Rome.

Sentence nr: 96
And I have a little more faith in our likely eaters.

Sentence nr: 97
They picked Ethiopia, didn’t they?

Sentence nr: 98
Still, we’re agreed that the real competition here is for second — and Vietnam, the potluck entrant, seems like the best bet.

Sentence nr: 99
The other countries have little culinary reputation or, in England’s case, a miserable one.

Sentence nr: 100
Nate: Well, the order is about what we expected, but the margins are quite stunning.

Sentence nr: 101
Italy defeats England — 84 percent to 3 percent?

Sentence nr: 102
Indeed, the English were roundly thrashed by the Costa Ricans and Uruguayans.

Sentence nr: 103
They’re really almost as bad at this as they are at penalty kicks.

Sentence nr: 104
The dominant Italians move on, meanwhile, and will face a traditional rival, Greece, to start their knockout round.

Sentence nr: 105
Walter: England got a well-deserved annihilation.

Sentence nr: 106
I can’t name a single Costa Rican specialty, but I’m sure I’d prefer the dish of the day to whatever a crumpet actually is.

Sentence nr: 107
Nate: I’m curious about France.

Sentence nr: 108
It seems almost certain to advance in a rather average group.

Sentence nr: 109
But do our likely eaters think of French food — but of course!

Sentence nr: 110
— as among the best cuisines in the world, or as fussy and pretentious?

Sentence nr: 111
Walter: I’m pulling for the Swiss here (recall my cheese-based diet).

Sentence nr: 112
But China, the Potluck entrant, is a ringer no matter where you put it.

Sentence nr: 113
Nate: Indeed, China is a tough draw for Switzerland, which otherwise might have Mueslixed its way to second place.

Sentence nr: 114
Walter: This is another example, like Italy, of a national cuisine that might win but for the wrong reasons.

Sentence nr: 115
Chinese food — actual Chinese food — is divine, but China will win out because of General Tso.

Sentence nr: 116
Nate: In my experience, Americans are every bit as likely to settle for middling interpretations of French food.

Sentence nr: 117
If you have a barely adequate steak frites, a few brunch cocktails and a waiter who goes by Pierre (even if he’s really named Peter), you can have a bustling business.

Sentence nr: 118
Nate: France did just fine, it turns out.

Sentence nr: 119
In fact, it almost beat China outright although “draw” just barely took the plurality in that match.

Sentence nr: 120
<bar>France benefited in part from weighting for likely eaters; it got an average of 53 percent of the vote in our weighted sample as compared with 49 percent in the overall sample.

Sentence nr: 121
That isn’t a huge difference and it didn’t swing any matches at this stage.

Sentence nr: 122
But France will face some tougher competition down the road.</bar> Walter: Cuba totally deserves to win this one, but the second-place contender is anyone’s guess.

Sentence nr: 123
I’d go with Argentinian food, but only because most Americans have at least some sort of flavor anchor when it comes to South American cuisine.

Sentence nr: 124
Also, Argentina is known for its steaks, which are the best food.

Sentence nr: 125
Nate: You seem fairly keen on this group.

Sentence nr: 126
By contrast, another person in our office — not an aspiring food-hipster like we are!

Sentence nr: 127
— described it as the “Group of Death,” meaning that he’d rather die than eat the food from any of these countries.

Sentence nr: 128
That’s totally unfair, of course.

Sentence nr: 129
But these are the sorts of countries that Americans may not like for reasons having little to do with the cuisine.

Sentence nr: 130
Several of them have a checkered political history with the United States: Would Iranian food have better chances if we’d called it “Persian” instead?

Sentence nr: 131
Walter: This is, indeed, the hipster group.

Sentence nr: 132
The food is great, but you probably haven’t heard of it.

Sentence nr: 133
<bar>The vast majority of respondents had never experienced the cuisines of Bosnia (88 percent), Nigeria (87 percent), Iran (75 percent) or Argentina (62 percent).

Sentence nr: 134
Cuba goes on to the next round, where it regrettably — but almost definitely — goes down to Chinese food.</bar> Nate: That unfamiliarity seemed to translate into indifference as most of the results in the group were draws.

Sentence nr: 135
Iran’s results, 0-0-4, were particularly strange.

Sentence nr: 136
Like India, it’s knocked out despite being undefeated, but like England it went winless.

Sentence nr: 137
Walter: You’d think that if the U.S. wins our tournament it’s only because we’re exclusively surveying Americans.

Sentence nr: 138
However, don’t put this on home-plate advantage alone: America has successfully adapted other cuisines — Chinese and Italian come to mind — and besides, it’s a steak country.

Sentence nr: 139
Does this nation have culinary sins?

Sentence nr: 140
Of McCourse.

Sentence nr: 141
But it absolutely deserves to be a contender.

Sentence nr: 142
Nate: This is otherwise a fairly strong group, with Germany, Portugal and Turkey.

Sentence nr: 143
America’s a great place to eat, too.

Sentence nr: 144
But let me raise a few objections.

Sentence nr: 145
First, the U.S. is great because of the stunning array of consumer choices.

Sentence nr: 146
However, it also requires some time and some money to sort through all the options.

Sentence nr: 147
If you know what you’re doing in New York or Los Angeles or Chicago or San Francisco, perhaps you can eat better than anywhere else in the world.

Sentence nr: 148
But the floor is higher in some other locations: I’d rather walk into a restaurant chosen completely at random in Tokyo or Barcelona or Mexico City, for instance.

Sentence nr: 149
Second, our survey asked specifically about “traditional” cuisine.

Sentence nr: 150
What is traditional American cuisine?

Sentence nr: 151
Is it what the Pilgrims ate?

Sentence nr: 152
Is it state fair food like corn dogs and cheeseburgers?

Sentence nr: 153
Is it regional American cooking, like Southern food?

Sentence nr: 154
Of course, you can make the case that assimilating cuisine from different cultures is an American tradition.

Sentence nr: 155
But I’d argue that highly successful attempts at assimilation are relatively new.

Sentence nr: 156
Check out the menu collection from the Los Angeles Public Library, for instance.

Sentence nr: 157
“Japanese” food in 1960s LA meant 16 different kinds of meat with teriyaki sauce.

Sentence nr: 158
I’m not going to be unhappy if the United States makes a deep run in the tournament.

Sentence nr: 159
But remove the home-plate advantage and our case is not all that different from England’s or Australia’s.

Sentence nr: 160
Those countries also have rapidly improving culinary cultures and assimilate plenty of great food from the rest of the world.

Sentence nr: 161
But they failed to win a single match.

Sentence nr: 162
We’re going to do a lot better.

Sentence nr: 163
Nate: The U.S. becomes the fourth country after Italy, Spain and Mexico to sweep the group stage.

Sentence nr: 164
However, its margins were closer than the other three — Germany came within a few percentage points of drawing the U.S., for instance.

Sentence nr: 165
Perhaps that suggests some vulnerability in the knockout stage.

Sentence nr: 166
The rest of the group resolved itself oddly.

Sentence nr: 167
Germany advances despite having a worse vote differential than Portugal because it beat Turkey while Portugal drew Turkey.

Sentence nr: 168
I’m mildly disappointed not to see a better performance from Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries, although one could argue that Greek food is Middle Eastern.

Sentence nr: 169
Walter: This is a sleeper group.

Sentence nr: 170
Any nation here could claim the top spot.

Sentence nr: 171
Belgian fries are fantastic but if Belgium wins it’s thanks to waffles.

Sentence nr: 172
Russian food is absolutely underrated, South Korea has bulgogi, Algeria has a fusion of Mediterranean and Middle Eastern cuisines that can’t be beat, and Thai food is exceedingly popular.

Sentence nr: 173
Nate: I agree that this is among the harder groups to call.

Sentence nr: 174
I doubt very many Americans will share your sympathies for Russia, however.

Sentence nr: 175
The one I’m curious about is Korean food.

Sentence nr: 176
Tyler Cowen said Korean food tends to be reasonably good in the United States precisely because it isn’t very popular: There isn’t much of a market for it beyond Korean-Americans and food-hipsters, who have high standards.

Sentence nr: 177
I’m not sure how a cuisine like that will perform under our rules.

Sentence nr: 178
By contrast, there’s a lot of mediocre Pad Thai served in the United States, although one trip to SriPraPhai or Lotus of Siam should assure you of Thai cuisine’s potential.

Sentence nr: 179
Nate: Looks like the sleeper was Thailand.

Sentence nr: 180
With a 4-0-0 record and some commanding margins in a tough group, Thailand might have the stuff to make a run to the semifinals or beyond.

Sentence nr: 181
Belgium goes in ahead of South Korea, meanwhile, after winning the vote differential tiebreaker.

Sentence nr: 182
Walter: We’ll move on to the knockout round soon.

Sentence nr: 183
Here’s what the matches looks like.

Sentence nr: 184
There are a lot of extremely compelling regional fights going on in the Round of 16.

Sentence nr: 185
Mexico vs. Ethiopia Japan vs. Vietnam France vs. Argentina U.S. vs. Belgium Spain vs. Brazil Italy vs. Greece Cuba vs. China Thailand vs. Germany Nate: A lot of olive oil will be spilled in the Italy vs. Greece clash.

Sentence nr: 186
And I think we’ve identified some of the other top contenders.

Sentence nr: 187
Mexico, Spain, Thailand and the United States also went 4-0-0 in the opening round, while France and China went 3-0-1.

Sentence nr: 188
But we’ll be conducting a new set of surveys for the knockout round.

